THE  LIBRARY 

OF 

THE  UNIVERSITY 
OF  CALIFORNIA 

LOS  ANGELES 


Professor 
LLevelyn  M.    Baell 


GALLOWAY <Sc  PORTER  LTD 

NEWA.  SECOND-HAND  BOOKSELLERS 
30  SIDNEY  STREET, CAMBRIDGE 
(ENG) 


THE     TRAGEDY 


ROMEO     AND     JULIET 


THE  WORKS 

OF 


THE    TRAGEDY    OF 
ROMEO     AND    JULIET 

EDITED    BY 

EDWARD    DOWDEN 


METHUEN   AND    CO. 
36   ESSEX    STREET:    STRAND 

LONDON 
1900 


C  O  N  T  K  N  T  S 

•A(,K 

INTRODUCTION ix 

THK  TRAGEDY  or  ROMKO  AND  JULIEI i 

APPENDIX  I. — SOME  PASSAGES  FROM  THE  QUARTO  OF  1597  183 
APPENDIX  II. — ANALYSIS  OF  BROOKE'S   "THE  TRAGICALL 

HlSTORYE   OF     ROMEUS    AND   JULIET,1'    WITH    QUOTA- 
TIONS            188 

APPENDIX  III. — RUNAWAY'S  EYES  .                                       .  197 


INTRODUCTION 

IN  the  text  of  this  edition  of  Romeo  and  Juliet  I  have 
introduced  only  two  readings  not  previously  found  in 
editions  of  authority ;  first,  I  have  placed  a  comma  in 
I.  ii.  32  after  the  words  "view  of";  secondly,  in  III.  v. 
43  I  have  inserted  the  hyphens  in  "love-lord"  and 
"  husband-friend."  I  hope  these  slight  changes  may 
commend  themselves  to  some  readers  ;  if  the  former  be 
correct,  it  solves  a  long  recognised  difficulty.  I  have  not 
altered  the  received  punctuation  of  III.  ii.  5-8,  although 
I  venture  to  suggest  in  Appendix  III.  ("  Runaway's 
eyes")  a  new  punctuation,  which,  as  regards  lines  5,  6, 
commends  itself  to  me ;  the  suggestion  respecting  line  7 
I  offer  as  a  mere  possibility.  I  am  not  so  sanguine  as  to 
expect  that  readers  long  familiar  with  the  received  text 
will  accept  my  suggestions  as  to  that  difficult  passage ; 
but  how  should  any  critic  neglect  to  add  his  stone  to  the 
cairn  under  which  the  meaning  lies  buried?  I  accept 
Theobald's  reading  "sun"  in  I.  i.  157,  and  in  so  doing 
follow  the  best  modern  editors.  With  some  reluctance 
I  read  in  II.  i.  13,  "Adam  Cupid,"  yielding  to  the 
authority  of  Dyce  (ed.  2),  the  Cambridge  editors,  Furness, 
and  others ;  and  in  a  note  I  try  to  point  out  possi- 


x  INTRODUCTION 

bilities  which  may  justify  or  lead  towards  justifying  the 
"  Abraham  "  of  all  the  early  texts. 

I  may  add  here  that  if  the  nickname  "  Abraham  " 
was  given  to  Cupid  because  he  is  the  "  father  of  many 
nations,"  an  additional  comic  effect  might  be  gained  by 
choosing  for  Cupid  a  name  recognised  as  a  favourite  one 
with  Elizabethan  Puritans.  In  Middleton's  The  Family 
of  Love,  Dryfat,  a  member  of  the  "  Family,"  says,  "  I 
have  Aminadabs  and  Abrahams  to  my  godsons."  I 
must  leave  it  to  some  more  ingenious  critic  to  make  the 
discovery  that  we  should  read  "  Abron  Cupid,"  and  that 
Shakespeare  had  noticed  in  Cooper's  Thesaurus  (1573): 
"  Abron,  the  name  of  a  man,  whose  sensualitie  and 
delicate  life  is  growne  to  a  Proverbe." 

The  Quarto  editions  of  Romeo  and  Jtdiet  are  the 
following : — 

"  An  Excellent  conceited  Tragedie  of  Romeo  and  Juliet, 
As  it  hath  bene  often  (with  great  applause)  plaid 
publiquely,  by  the  right  Honourable  the  L.  of  Hunsdon 
his  Servants.  London,  Printed  by  lohn  Banter. 

1597"  (Q  i). 

"  The  Most  Excellent  and  lamentable  Tragedie,  of 
Romeo  and  lulict.  Newly  corrected,  augmented,  and 
amended :  As  it  hath  bene  sundry  times  publiquely 
acted,  by  the  right  Honourable  the  Lord  Chamberlaine 
his  Servants.  London  Printed  by  Thomas  Creede,  for 
Cuthbert  Burby,  and  are  to  be  sold  at  his  shop  neare 
the  Exchange.  15 99."  This,  the  second  Quarto,  I  refer 
to  as  O,  unless  there  is  special  occasion  to  distinguish 
it  as  Q  2. 

The  third   Quarto  (Q    3)  was  printed    in    1609   for 


INTRODUCTION  xi 

John  Smethwick ;  the  title-page  describes  the  tragedy 
as  having  been  "  sundry  times  publiquely  Acted,  by  the 
Kings  Majesties  Servants  at  the  Globe." 

The  fourth  Quarto  (O  4),  printed  also  for  John 
Smethwicke,  is  without  date.  In  some  copies  the  word 
"  Globe  "  is  followed  by  "  Written  by  W.  Shake-speare." 
In  other  copies  (said  by  Halliwell-Phillipps  to  be  the 
later  issues)  the  name  of  the  author  does  not  appear. 

The  fifth  Quarto  (O  5)  is  dated  1637  ;  it  was  printed 
by  "  R.  Young  for  John  Smethwicke." 

The  text  of  Romeo  and  Juliet  in  the  first  Folio,  1623, 
(F)  was  derived  from  Q  3. 

The  editors  of  the  Cambridge  Shakespeare  observe : 
"  As  usual  there  are  a  number  of  changes,  some 
accidental,  some  deliberate,  but  all  generally  for  the 
worse,  excepting  the  changes  in  punctuation  and  in  the 
stage-directions.  The  punctuation,  as  a  rule,  is  more 
correct,  and  the  stage-directions  are  more  complete,  in 
the  Folio." 

The  second  Quarto — 1599 — first  gives  the  play  in 
full ;  it  is  our  best  authority  for  the  text ;  but  the  correc- 
tions of  the  later  Quartos  and  of  the  Folio  are  valuable 
aids  towards  ascertaining  the  text,  while  in  not  a  few 
passages  Q  I  lends  assistance  which  cannot  elsewhere 
be  found. 

In  the  present  edition  the  readings  of  Q  and  of  F 
which  differ  from  the  editor's  text  are  recorded,  except  a 
few  obvious  misprints  and  such  others  as  seem  wholly 
unimportant.  Not  many  references  are  made  to  O  3 , 
because  in  general  its  various  readings  passed  into  the 
text  of  F,  which  was  derived  from  that  Quarto.  For  my 


xii  INTRODUCTION 

references  to  Q  5  (which  are  few)  I  have  trusted  to  the 
Cambridge  Shakespeare  and  to  Furness. 

Q  i  differs  so  considerably,  and  in  so  many  minute 
details,  from  the  received  text,  that  the  variations  can- 
not be  rightly  exhibited  in  notes ;  it  must  be  read  in 
its  entirety,  and  happily  it  is  easily  accessible  in  the 
facsimile  by  Praetorius,  in  Mommsen's  reprint,  in  the 
Cambridge  Shakespeare^  in  Furness,  and  (with  most 
advantage  for  the  student)  in  the  New  Shakspere 
Society's  reprint  of  Parallel  Texts  of  the  First  Two 
Quartos,  admirably  edited  by  Mr.  Daniel.  Such 
readings  as  have  been  adopted  from  Q  I  into  the  text 
of  modern  editors  have  a  special  claim  to  attention  ; 
these  I  have,  with  few  exceptions,  recorded,  and  have 
added  in  notes  and  in  Appendix  I.  several  lines  and 
passages  differing  from  the  received  text  in  a  way  which 
can  hardly  be  accounted  for  by  errors  of  the  printer  or 
reporter.  In  these,  or  in  some  of  these,  we  probably 
find  work  of  Shakespeare  discarded  in  his  revision  of  the 
play. 

The  relation  of  Q  I  to  the  later  text  has  been  the 
subject  of  much  discussion.  I  cannot  state  the  results  of 
my  own  study  better  than  by  quoting  from  Mr.  Daniel's 
Introduction  to  the  Parallel  Texts :  "  A  hasty  and 
separate  perusal  of  Q  I  may  leave  the  reader  with  the 
impression  that  it  represents  an  earlier  play  than  that 
given  in  the  subsequent  editions  ;  read  line  for  line  with 
Q  2  its  true  character  soon  becomes  apparent.  It  is  an 
edition  made  up  partly  from  copies  of  portions  of  the 
original  play,  partly  from  recollection  and  from  notes 
taken  during  the  performance.  Q  2  gives  us  for  the 


INTRODUCTION  xiii 

first  time  a  substantially  true  representation  of  the 
original  play.  Still  Q  I  is  of  great  value,  as  it  affords 
the  means  of  correcting  many  errors  which  had  crept 
into  the  '  copy  '  from  which  O  2  was  printed,  and  also, 
in  its  more  perfect  portions,  affords  conclusive  evidence 
that  that  '  copy  '  undenvent  revision,  received  some  slight 
augmentations,  and,  in  some  few  places,  must  have  been 
entirely  rewritten."  As  evidence  of  the  last  statement 
I  may  refer  my  reader  to  Appendix  I.,  to  which  the 
following  may  here  be  added;  in  III.  ii.  57—60  Juliet, 
in  our  received  text,  speaks  : 

O  break,  my  heart  !  poor  bankrupt,  break  at  once  ! 
To  prison,  eyes,  ne'er  look  on  liberty  ! 
Vile  earth,  to  earth  resign,  end  motion  here, 
And  thou  and  Romeo  press  one  heavy  bier  ! 

These  are  evidently  new  lines  written  to  replace  those  of 
O  I,  which  run  thus  : 

Ah  Romeo,  Romeo,  what  disaster  hap 

Hath  severd  thee  from  thy  true  Juliet? 

Ah  why  should  Heaven  so  much  conspire  with  Woe, 

Or  Fate  envie  our  happie  Marriage, 

So  soone  to  sunder  us  by  timelesse  Death  ? 

Shall  we  conjecture  that  Shakespeare  felt  that  the  sense 
of  fatality,  though  proper  to  Romeo,  was  less  character- 
istic of  the  strong-willed  Juliet  ? 

O  i,  then,  is  an  imperfect  representation,  piratically 
issued,  of  the  same  play  which  is  given  fully  and,  in 
the  main,  aright  in  O  2  ;  but  before  Q  2  appeared 
Shakespeare  had  revised  the  play,  and  had  rewritten  a 
few  passages.  The  theory  of  Mr.  Grant  White  that  traces 


xiv  INTRODUCTION 

of  another  hand  than  Shakespeare's  may  be  detected  in 
the  earlier  version  of  the  play  is,  I  think,  sufficiently 
refuted  by  Mr.  T.  A.  Spalding  in  his  paper  "  On  the  First 
Quarto  of  Romeo  and  Juliet:  Is  there  any  evidence  of  a 
Second  Hand  in  it  ?  "  printed  in  Transactions  of  the  New 
Shakspere  Society,  1877—79. 

An  interesting  peculiarity  of  Q  I  is  found  in  the  stage- 
directions  ;  they  were  evidently  noted  down  by  a 
spectator  in  the  theatre,  perhaps  by  the  shorthand 
writer  who  probably  supplied  much  of  the  manuscript. 
They  give  us  pleasant  glimpses  of  the  stage-business 
during  the  original  presentation  of  Romeo  and  Juliet.  In 
the  opening  scene  a  stage-direction  serves  as  a  substitute 
for  the  bustling  dialogue,  which  in  the  clash  of  swords 
and  clubs  may  have  reached  the  reporter's  ears  too 
imperfectly  to  be  reported  :  "  They  draw,  to  them  enters 
Tybalt,  they  fight,  to  them  the  Prince,  old  Mountague, 
and  his  wife,  old  Capulet  and  his  wife,  and  other  Citizens 
and  part  them."  Later  we  have  the  departing  guests 
whispering  excuses  to  Capulet — "  they  whisper  in  his 
eare " ;  Mercutio  insulting  the  Nurse's  dignity — "  he 
walkes  by  them,  and  sings " ;  the  Nurse  rebuking  her 
too  passive  protector — "  she  turnes  to  Peter  her  man  "  ; 
Juliet  entering  "  somewhat  fast  "  and  embracing  Romeo  ; 
Tybalt  thrusting  Mercutio  under  Romeo's  arm  ;  the 
Nurse  "  wringing  her  hands,  with  the  ladder  of  cordes  in 
her  lap " ;  Romeo  offering  to  stab  himself,  and  the 
Nurse  snatching  the  dagger  away  ;  Capulet  calling  Paris 
again,  as  he  offers  to  go  in,  in  order  that  he  may  make 
the  "  desperate  tender  "  of  Juliet's  love  ;  Juliet  kneeling 
to  her  father,  and  again  looking  after  the  departing  Nurse, 


INTRODUCTION  xv 

before  she  breaks  forth  with  the  words,  "  Ancient 
damnation,  O  most  cursed  fiend "  ;  the  mourners  for 
Juliet  all  crying  out  at  once,  and  wringing  their  hands; 
Countie  Paris  and  his  Page  bearing  flowers  and  sweet 
water  to  Juliet's  tomb;  Friar  Laurence,  at  the  entrance 
to  the  tomb,  stooping  and  looking  on  the  blood  and 
weapons. 

The  date  at  which  Romeo  and  Juliet  was  written 
cannot  be  certainly  determined.  The  title-page  of  O  i 
describes  the  tragedy  as  having  been  often  played 
publicly  by  the  Lord  of  Ilunsdon's  servants.  Malone 
ascertained  that  two  Lords  Hunsdon,  Henry,  the  father, 
and  George,  his  son,  filled  the  office  of  Lord  Chamberlain 
of  the  Household  to  Queen  Elizabeth.  Henry,  the 
father,  died  July  22,  1596;  on  his  death,  Shakespeare's 
company  came  under  the  protection  of  his  son,  who 
was  appointed  Lord  Chamberlain  on  April  17,  1597. 
Before  July  22,  1596,  and  after  April  1597  the  actors 
would  be  styled  the  Lord  Chamberlain's  servants  (as 
they  are  on  the  title-page  of  O  2) ;  in  the  interval 
they  were  the  Lord  Hunsdon's  servants ;  and  hence 
we  may  infer  that  it  was  during  this  interval  that  the 
presentations  spoken  of  on  the  title-page  of  Q  I  took 
place. 

An  allusion  to  the  play  by  John  Weever  has  been 
supposed  to  carry  back  the  date  to  1595.  Weever's 
Epigrammes  was  published  in  1599,  when  the  author 
was  twenty-three  years  old  ;  he  tells  us  that  most  of  the 
epigrams  were  written  when  he  was  only  twenty ;  he 
attained  that  age  in  1596,  and  to  suppose  that  his 
reference  to  Romeo  and  Juliet  is  of  a  date  earlier  than 


xvi  INTRODUCTION 

that  year  is    a   gratuitous    assumption.      An   allusion   in 
Marston's  Scourge  of  Villanie — 

I  set  thy  lips  abroach,  from  whence  doth  flow 
Naught  but  pure  Juliet  and  Romeo — 

testifies  to  the  popularity  of  the  play,  and  possibly  by 
the  mention  of  "  Curtain  plaudities  "  points  to  the  Curtain 
theatre  as  the  place  of  representation  ;  but  the  Scourge 
of  Villanie  is  later  in  date  than  the  first  Quarto  of 
Romeo  and  Juliet.  Some  lines  in  The  Wisdom  of  Doctor 
Dodipoll  which  imitate  (or  seem  to  imitate)  words  of 
Juliet,  and  some  resemblances  between  Romeo  and  Juliet 
and  Wily  Beguiled,  when  dates  are  scrutinised  (see 
Daniel's  edition  of  Romeo  and  Juliet,  New  Sh.  Soc.  p. 
xxxv),  prove  equally  fallacious  in  helping  us  to  fix  a 
date. 

Turning  to  the  play  itself,  we  find  mention  of  "  the 
first  and  second  cause  "  (il.  iv.),  which  has  been  regarded, 
on  no  sufficient  grounds,  as  suggested  by  Vincentio 
Saviolo  his  Practise  (1594  and  1595).  Mr.  Fleay  has 
noticed  that  the  reference  may  be  to  "  The  Book  of  Honor 
and  Arms,  wherein  is  discussed  the  causes  of  quarrel,"  etc. 
(Stationers'  Register,  December  13,  1589).  There  are 
undoubtedly  reminiscences  in  Romeo  and  Juliet  of 
Marlowe's  plays.  The  lines 

But  soft  !  what  light  through  yonder  window  breaks  ? 
It  is  the  east,  and  Juliet  is  the  sun  ! 

seem  to  echo  Marlowe's  lines  in  The  Jew  of  Malta,  II.  i. 
41,  42: 

But  stay,  what  star  shines  yonder  in  the  east  ? 
The  loadstar  of  my  life,  if  Abigail. 


INTRODUCTION  xvii 

Juliet's  age  is  reduced  by  Shakespeare  from  the  sixteen 
years  of  his  original  (the  Romeus  and  Juliet  of  Brooke) 
to  fourteen.  "  Death  lies  on  her,"  exclaims  Capulet 

(IV.  v.)( 

like  an  untimely  frost 
Upon  the  sweetest  flower  of  all  the  field. 

At  the  close  of  Act  I.  of  The  Jew  of  Malta  Don  Mathias 
describes  the  Jew's  daughter,  now  entered  into  a 
convent : 

A  fair  young  maid,  scarce  fourteen  years  of  age, 
The  sweetest  flower  in  Cytherea's  field, 
Cropt  from  the  pleasures  of  the  fruitful  earth.1 

Still  more  striking  is  the  resemblance  between  the  open- 
ing lines  of  Juliet's  soliloquy  (ill.  ii.),  "  Gallop  apace, 
you  fiery  footed  steeds,"  etc.,  and  lines  in  Marlowe's 
Edward  II.  IV.  iii. : 

Gallop  apace,  bright  Phoebus,  through  the  sky, 
And  dusky  night,  in  rusty  iron  car, 
Between  you  both  shorten  the  time,  etc. 

Shakespeare  was  much  influenced  by  Marlowe  in  some 
early  plays;  but  Romeo  and  Juliet  is  not  written  in  disciple- 
ship  to  Marlowe,  and  it  must  be  remembered  that  in  plays 
as  late  as  As  You  Like  It  and  Troilus  and  Crcssida 
reminiscences  of  Marlowe  are  found.2 

These  echoes  from  Marlowe  have  a  certain  bearing 
on  the  supposed  imitation  of  lines  of  Romeo  and  Juliet, 

1  This  interesting    parallel    has   been    pointed   out  to  me  by  Mr.   \V.  J. 
Craig. 

2  The  points  in  common  between  Juliet's  Nurse  and  the  Nurse  in  Dido 
Queen  of  Carthage  by  Marlowe  and  Nash  seem  to  me  of  little  importance. 
Shakespeare  found  his  Nurse  in  Brooke's  poem. 


xvlii  INTRODUCTION 

V.  iii.,  by  Daniel  in  his  Complaint  of  Rosa mond  (i  592). 
The  most  striking  of  these  resemblances  is  that  of 
Daniel's  verses — 

And  nought-respecting  death  (the  last  of  paines) 
Plac'd  his  pale  colours  (th'  ensigne  of  his  might) 
Upon  his  new-got  spoil  before  his  right — 

to  Shakespeare's — • 

Thou  art  not  conquer'd  ;  beauty's  ensign  yet 
Is  crimson  in  thy  lips  and  in  thy  cheeks, 
And  death's  pale  flag  is  not  advanced  there. 

Daniel  was  charged— not  altogether  unfairly — with  the 
infirmity  of  plagiarism.  But  Shakespeare  was  certainly  a 
reader  of  some  of  Daniel's  poetry ;  and  if  he  derived 
suggestions  from  Marlowe,  why  may  he  not  have  taken 
a  hint  from  Daniel,  and  vindicated  his  conveyance  by  a 
triumphant  ennoblement  of  Daniel's  imagery  and  ex- 
pression ? l 

Far  too  much  insistence,  in  my  opinion,  has  been 
laid  on  the  Nurse's  reference  (l.  iii.)  to  the  earthquake 
— "  'Tis  since  the  earthquake  now  eleven  years."  An 
allusion  may  not  improbably  have  been  intended  to  the 
earthquake  of  1580  felt  in  England.  But  the  humour 
of  the  allusion  may  lie  in  the  fact  that  the  Nurse,  who 
insists  on  the  accuracy  of  her  recollection — "  Nay,  I  do 
bear  a  brain," — is  really  astray  in  her  chronology.  Juliet 
is  now  on  the  point  of  being  fourteen  years  of  age  ;  yet 
eleven  years  previously — at  three  years  old — she  was  only 

1  The  case  is  greatly  strengthened  l>y  a  comparison  of  I.ticrciC  with 
Daniel's  Rosamond.  There  can  here  be  no  doubt  that  Shakespeare  was  the 
debtor.  See  the  article,  "  Shakespeare's  Lucrece,"  by  K\vig,  in  Aii^lia  xxii., 
Neue  Folge  Hand  x.,  Yicrtrs  I  left.  pp.  436-448. 


INTRODUCTION  xlx 

about  to  be  weaned,  and  had  barely  learnt  to  "  run  and 
waddle,"  with  a  risk  of  breaking  her  brow.  The  Nurse 
again  asseverates  that  "  since  that  time  it  is  eleven 
years " ;  but  this  making  the  most  of  a  jest  seems 
slender  evidence  on  behalf  of  the  theory  that  the  play 
was  produced  in  the  year  I59I.1 

There  is  no  decisive  evidence  to  prove  that  the 
tragedy  was  written  long  before  its  presentation  in  i  596, 
when,  probably,  its  popularity  called  forth  a  ballad  (entry 
in  Stationers'  Register,  August  5)  on  the  subject  of  Romeo 
and  Juliet.  Yet  most  readers,  I  think,  have  felt  that  it 
is  a  play  of  Shakespeare's  early  years  of  authorship ;  the 
lyrical  character  of  the  play,  though  partly  accounted  for 
by  the  love-theme,  the  abundance  of  rhyme,  not  only 
in  couplets,  but  alternate,  and  arranged  in  sextet  and 
sonnet  form,  the  pleasure  of  the  writer  in  forced  conceits, 
and  play  upon  words,  sometimes  even  in  serious  passages, 
point  to  an  early  date.2  When  his  judgment  had  matured 
Shakespeare  could  not  have  written  so  very  ill  as  he 
sometimes  does  in  Romeo  and  Juliet,  but  a  writer  of 
genius  could  at  an  early  age,  when  inspired  by  the 
passion  of  his  theme,  have  written  as  admirably  as  he 
does  even  in  the  noblest  passages  of  the  fifth  Act.  That 
he  was  conscious  of  having  already  attained  comparative 
mastery  in  his  art  may  be  inferred  from  his  independence 
of  Marlowe,  and  the  implied  criticism  of  the  style  of 


1  If  anyone  should  care  to  sec  a  catalogue  of  earthquakes  compiled  by  a 
contemporary  of  Shakespeare,  he  will  find  one  in  the  Indice  to  Discorsi  del 
S.  Allesandro  Sardo  (Venice,  1586),  which  volume  includes  a  treatise  "Del 
Terremoto." 

-  Gervinus  notices,  beside  the  sonnet-form  in  Romeo  and  Juliet,  something 
corresponding  to  the  epithalamium  ( Juliet's  soliloquy)  and  to  the  dawn-song. 


xx  INTRODUCTION 

Kyd  in  the  exclamatory  lamentations  over  Juliet  sup- 
posed dead.  I  can  hardly  doubt  that  Mr.  Spalding  is 
right  in  stating  that  the  line 

O  love,  O  life,  not  life  but  love  in  death, 
and  again, 

O  child,  O  child,  my  soul  and  not  my  child, 

are  parodies  on  Hieronimo's  words  in  The  Spanish 
Tragedy : 

O  eyes  !  no  eyes,  but  fountains  fraught  with  tears  ; 

O  life  !  no  life,  but  lively  forms  in  death  ; 

O  world  !  no  world,  but  mass  of  public  wrongs. 

Yet  there  is  something  inartificial  in  introducing  such 
irony  of  literary  criticism  into  the  body  of  the  play ;  and 
Shakespeare  took  a  better  method  in  his  "  tedious  brief 
scene  "  of  very  tragical  mirth  in  A  Midsummer  Night's 
Dream,  and  again  in  yEneas'  tale  to  Dido  (where  he 
reproduces  rather  than  parodies  an  earlier  style),  which 
the  player  recites  before  Hamlet.  On  the  whole,  we 
might  place  Romeo  and  Juliet,  on  grounds  of  internal 
evidence,  near  The  Rape  of  Lucrece ;  portions  may  be 
earlier  in  date  ;  certain  passages  of  the  revised  version 
are  certainly  later;  but  I  think  that  1595  may  serve  as 
an  approximation  to  a  central  date,  and  cannot  be  very 
far  astray. 

The  basis,  as  Malone  puts  it,  upon  which  Shakespeare 
built  his  play  is  the  Romeus  and  Juliet  of  Arthur  Brooke 
or  Broke,  of  which  I  have  given  an  analysis  in  Appendix 
II.  Brooke's  poem,  which  is  a  free  rehandling  in  verse  of 


INTRODUCTION  xxi 

Pierre  Boisteau's  French  version  of  a  novel  by  Bandcllo, 
was  first  published  in  I562.1  Painter's  prose  rendering 
in  the  Palace  of  Pleasure  of  Boisteau's  story  appeared 
some  years  later.  From  this  last  Shakespeare  derived, 
if  anything,  certainly  very  little  ;  but  how  carefully  he 
followed  Brooke  will  appear  from  my  analysis,  and  more 
fully  from  Mr.  Daniel's  valuable  Introduction  to  the 
New  Shakspere  Society's  reprint  of  Brooke's  poem  and 
Painter's  prose.  That  Shakespeare  agrees  with  Brooke 
where  the  latter  differs  from  Painter  was  decisively 
established  by  Malone :  "  I.  In  the  poem  the  Prince  of 
Verona  is  called  Escalus ;  so  also  in  the  play.  In 
Painter's  translation  from  Boisteau  he  is  named  Signor 
Escala,  and  sometimes  Lord  Bartholomew  of  Escala.  2. 
In  Painter's  novel  the  family  of  Romeo  are  called  the 
Montesches;  in  the  poem  and  in  the  play  the  Montagues. 
3.  The  messenger  employed  by  Friar  Lawrence  to  carry 
a  letter  to  Romeo  is  in  Painter's  translation  called 
Anselme;  in  the  poem  and  in  the  play  Friar  John  is 
employed  in  this  business.  4.  The  circumstance  of 
Capulet's  writing  down  the  names  of  the  guests  whom 
he  invites  to  supper  is  found  in  the  poem  and  in  the  play, 
but  is  not  mentioned  by  Painter,  nor  is  it  found  in  the 
original  Italian  novel.  5.  The  residence  of  the  Capulets 
in  the  original  and  in  Painter  is  called  Villa  Franca ;  in 
the  poem  and  in  the  play  Freetown?1  6.  Several  passages 
of  Romeo  and  Juliet  appear  to  have  been  formed  on  hints 

1  In  his  address  "To  the  Reader"  Brooke  mentions  that  he  had  seen 
"the  same  argument  lately  set  foorth  on  stage,"  with  more  commendation 
than  he  can  look  for. 

-  In  the  play  it  is  the  name  of  the  "common  judgment-place"  of  the 
Prince. — E.  D. 


xxii  INTRODUCTION 

furnished   by  the  poem,  of  which   no   traces  are   found 
either  in  Painter's  novel,  or  in  Boisteau,  or  the  original." 

Brooke's  poem  has  been  unjustly  depreciated ;  yet  it 
contains  no  poetry  of  a  high  order.  If  Romeo  and  Juliet 
owed  to  Shakespeare,  as  Mr.  Grant  White  has  said,  only 
its  dramatic  form  and  poetic  decoration,  we  might  still 
add  with  the  critic — This  is  to  say  that  "  the  earth  owes 
to  the  sun  only  its  verdure  and  flowers,  the  air  only  its 
perfume  and  its  balm,  the  heavens  only  their  azure  and 
their  glow."  But  in  fact  Shakespeare  departs  from 
Brooke,  as  Mr.  White  proceeds  to  point  out,  in  several 
important  particulars.  He  accelerates  the  action,  reducing 
the  time  from  months  to  days,  and  thus  adds  impetuosity 
to  the  torrent  of  passion.  He  creates  from  a  mere  passing 
hint  of  Brooke  the  brilliant  and  gallant  Mercutio.  In 
Brooke's  poem  Mercutio  appears  but  once  for  a  moment, 
as  a  courtier  in  the  ballroom  of  Capulet ;  he  is  "  courteous 
of  his  speech "  and  "  pleasant  of  device " ;  bold  among 
the  bashful  maids  as  a  lion  among  lambs ;  and  nature 
has  given  him  the  gift  of  hands  that  are  colder  than 
frozen  mountain  ice.  But  he  does  not  serve,  as  with 
Shakespeare,  by  his  vivid  intellectuality  to  set  off  the 
imaginative  passion  of  Romeo ;  he  is  not  at  once  the 
irrepressible  mocker  and  the  chivalrous  protector ;  nor 
does  he  die,  still  jesting  and  still  gallant,  before  the 
tragedy  darkens  to  its  close.  Shakespeare,  again,  it  is 
who  introduces  Tybalt  at  the  old  accustomed  feast  of 
Capulet,  and  thus,  incarnating  in  an  individual  the  rage 
of  faction,  brings  hatred  face  to  face  with  love.  The 
character  of  the  Nurse  is  found  in  Brooke,  but  Shakespeare 
admirably  develops  its  humorous  side.  He  reduces  the 


INTRODUCTION  xxiii 

age  of  Juliet  from  sixteen  to  fourteen,  the  age  of 
Marlowe's  Abigail,  so  heightening  the  miracle  of  love, 
which  transforms  her  from  a  child  to  a  heroic  woman. 
Me  deepens  her  solitude  by  depriving  Lady  Capulet  of  a 
mother's  tenderness,  and  showing  her  as  a  somewhat 
unsympathetic  woman  of  the  world.  And  he  brings 
the  lord-lover  Paris,  "  a  man  of  wax,"  to  the  church- 
yard, with  his  flowers  and  perfumed  water,  to  die, 
and  to  illustrate  the  gentleness,  the  resolution,  and  the 
magnanimity  of  Romeo. 

The  Romeo  and  Juliet  legend  has  a  long  history, 
and  it  is  not  necessary  here  to  trace  it  in  detail.1 
Almost  at  the  moment  when  Shakespeare  was  writing 
his  tragedy  the  Italian  Girolamo  de  la  Corte  published 
his  History  of  Verona  (1594-96),  and  there  recorded  as 
matter  of  historical  fact  the  story  of  the  star-crossed 
lovers.  He  assigns  the  events  to  the  year  1303,  when 
Verona  was  ruled  by  Bartolomeo  de  la  Scala.  But 
imaginary  history  seems  to  have  grown  out  of  legend, 
and  modern  criticism  has  disenchanted  the  "  Sepolcro 
di  Giulietta  e  Romeo  "  at  Verona.  One  of  the  incidents 
of  the  story — the  escape  from  enforced  marriage  by 
the  use  of  a  sleeping  potion — is  as  old  as  Xenophon 
of  Ephesus,  whose  romance  of  the  loves  of  Anthia 
and  Abrocomas  was  first  printed  from  the  only  ex- 
isting manuscript  in  1726.-  A  tale  of  much  more 

1  See  Alessandro  Torri's  Giulietta  c  Koinco  (Pisa,  1821),  the  Baron  de 
Guenifey's  Histoire  de  Romeo  Monteccki  et  de  Juliette  Cappelletti  (Paris, 
1836),  Mr.  Daniel's  Introduction  to  the  New  Sh.  Society's  reprints  of  Brooke 
and  Painter,  and  my  article  on  "Romeo  and  Juliet"  in  Transcripts  and 
Studies. 

"  It  was  at  once  translated  into  English  by  Mr.  Rooke  (1727).  My 
acquaintance  with  the  Epkesiaca  is  derived  from  the  French  version  of  1736  ; 


xxiv  INTRODUCTION 

recent  date,  that  among  the  novelle  of  Massuccio  of 
Salerno  (1476),  which  narrates  the  loves  of  Mariotto 
Mignanelli  and  Giannozza  Saraceni  of  Siena,  has  a 
sufficient  number  of  points  of  resemblance  to  Romeo  and 
Juliet  to  warrant  our  placing  it  in  the  genealogy  of  the 
drama.  The  lovers  are  secretly  married  by  a  Friar ; 
Mariotto  quarrels  with  a  citizen  of  note,  strikes  him  a 
fatal  blow  with  a  stick,  is  exiled,  and  flies  from  Siena  to 
Alexandria.  The  father  of  Giannozza  urges  her  to  mar- 
riage with  a  suitor  of  his  choice ;  she  resolves  to  feign 
herself  dead,  and  the  Friar  provides  the  sleeping  potion  ; 
she  is  buried  in  the  church  of  St.  Augustine ;  is  delivered 
from  the  tomb  by  the  Friar,  and  sails  for  Alexandria 
disguised  as  a  monk.  The  messenger  whom  she  had 
despatched  with  letters  to  her  husband  is  captured  by 
pirates  ;  Mariotto  hears  of  her  death ;  in  the  garb  of  a 
pilgrim  visits  her  tomb,  which  he  attempts  to  open ;  is 
seized,  condemned,  and  beheaded.  Giannozza  returns 
from  Alexandria  to  Siena,  and  in  a  convent  the  broken- 
hearted wife  dies. 

Some  fifty  years  after  the  publication  of  Massuccio's 
tale  Luigi  Da  Porto  wrote  his  Istoria  novellamente 
ritrovata  di  due  nobili  Amanti,  and  here  the  scene  is 
Verona,  and  the  lovers  are  named  Romeo  and  Giulietta. 

the  portion  which  has  some  resemblance  to  the  story  of  Juliet  will  be  found 
in  pp.  124-139.  In  the  anonymous  play,  How  a  Man  may  choose  a  Good 
Wife  from  a  Bad  (1602),  which  is  founded  on  a  novel  (Decade  III.,  Novella 
v.)  of  Cinthio's  Hecatommithi,  the  incidents  of  an  opiate  given  for  poison  to 
a  young  wife  by  her  faithless  husband,  her  burial,  and  revival  in  the  coffin,  are 
turned  to  comic  uses.  It  is  perhaps  worth  noting  that  here,  as  in  Romeo  and 
Juliet,  the  sale  of  poisons  is  spoken  of  as  illegal  : 

some  covetous  slave  for  coyne, 
Will  sell  it  him,  though  it  be  held  by  law, 
To  be  no  better  than  flat  fellony. 


INTRODUCTION  xxv 

Da  Porto's  novel  was  published  posthumously  at  Venice 
without  date,  about  the  year  1530.  It  is  substantially 
the  story  familiar  to  us,1  but  there  are  variations  in 
detail,  and  certain  personages  of  the  drama  are  wanting. 
Romeo  masks  not  as  a  pilgrim  but  as  a  nymph ;  the 
lovers  touch  hands  and  whisper  their  passion  in  the 
torch-dance ;  the  wooing  and  winning  are  not  swiftly 
accomplished  ;  the  sentence  of  banishment  is  not 
pronounced  until  after  some  happy  bridal  days  and 
nights  have  followed  the  secret  marriage  ;  the  nurse  has 
not  yet  appeared  in  the  story  ;  for  Paris  we  have  here 
the  Count  of  Lodrone  ;  Juliet  awakens  from  her  drugged 
sleep  in  the  tomb  before  the  poison  has  quite  overcrowed 
the  spirit  of  her  husband,  and  a  dialogue  ensues,  the 
motive  of  which  has  been  idealised  and  exalted  in  the 
opera  of  Gounod.  This  form  of  the  tragic  scene  was 
unknown  to  Shakespeare,  who  could  have  conveyed 
into  it  the  beauty  and  dignity  of  passion  ;  when  Otway, 
and  subsequently  Garrick,  with  Otway  as  his  guide, 
varied  from  the  Shakespearian  close,  they  struck  false 
notes  and  fell  into  the  phrases  of  convention  and  pseudo- 
pathos.2 

Adrian  Sevin's  French  transformation  of  the  story  of 
Romeo  and  Juliet  into  the  story  of  Halquadrich  and 
Burglipha  (1542)  has  little  interest,  and  does  not  take  a 
place  in  the  direct  line  of  the  development  of  the  tale 

1  The  reader  will  find  both  the  Italian  text  and  an  English  translation  in 
The  Original  Story  of  Komco  and  Jiti'i,:?,  by  G.  Pace-Sanfelice,  1868.  Mr. 
Rolfe  has  reproduced  Brydges'  rare  translation,  with  the  addition  of  omitted 
passages  :  Juliet  and  ROIHC.O,  Boston,  1895.  l'or  short  accounts,  sec  Daniel 
or  my  article  already  mentioned. 

3  It  is  needless  here  to  give  any  account  of  Otwny's  strange  appropriation 
and  transformation  of  Shakespeare's  play  in  his  Cains  Manns, 
b 


xxvi  INTRODUCTION 

from  Da  Porto  to  Shakespeare.  Nor  does  there  appear 
to  be,  except  through  a  certain  influence  exercised  on 
Bandello,  any  real  connection  between  Shakespeare's 
tragedy  and  the  poem  in  ottava  rima  published  at 
Venice  in  1553,  possibly  the  work  of  Gherardo  Bolderi 
assuming  the  name  of  Clitia  or  Clizia.  It  will  be  found 
in  Torri's  volume  already  mentioned.  Mr.  Daniel  points 
out  certain  variations  from  Da  Porto,  of  which  the  most 
interesting  is  that  here  for  the  first  time  Tebaldo's  death 
is  supposed  by  Lady  Capulet  to  be  the  cause  of  Juliet's 
grief.  An  attempt  was  made  by  J.  C.  Walker,  in  his 
Historical  Memoir  on  Italian  Tragedy,  1799  (pp.  49-64), 
to  show  that  Shakespeare  had  utilised  to  some  extent  as 
a  source  the  Hadriana,  a  tragedy  of  the  year  1578,  by 
the  blind  poet  Luigi  Groto.  The  loves  of  Latino  and 
Hadriana  are  unquestionably  derived  in  part  from  the 
loves  of  Da  Porto's  Romeo  and  Giulietta  ;  but  Mr.  Daniel, 
who  gives  a  complete  analysis  of  the  play,  is  right  in 
saying  that  the  resemblances  between  La  Hadriana  and 
Shakespeare's  tragedy  are  rather  to  be  sought  in  special 
passages  than  in  the  general  conduct  of  the  two  plays. 
Following  Walker  and  Lloyd,  and  adding  to  their 
enumeration,  he  notices  the  song  of  the  nightingale 
when  the  lovers  part,  the  description  of  the  effects  of  the 
opiate,  the  consolation  offered  to  the  father  on  the 
supposed  death  of  his  daughter,  and  other  seeming 
points  of  contact  ;  yet,  although  Groto  was  known 
in  England  in  Shakespeare's  time,  Mr.  Daniel's  con- 
clusion is  expressed  in  the  words :  "  Notwithstand- 
ing these  resemblances,  I  find  it  difficult  to  believe 
that  Shakespeare  could  have  made  use  of  Groto's 


INTRODUCTION  xxvii 

play"    —a     conclusion    with     which     I     am     in     entire 
agreement. 

Bandello's  novel,  of  which  Boisteau's  is  a  translation, 
stands  of  course  in  the  direct  line  of  the  ancestry  of 
Ronico  and  Juliet.  It  appeared  among  his  novclle 
published  at  Lucca  in  1554.  Referring  the  reader  to 
Mr.  Daniel's  more  detailed  account  of  the  points  in 
common  between  Bandello  and  Shakespeare,  I  may 
quote  what  I  have  elsewhere  written  :  "  Bandello  dwells 
on  Romeo's  amorous  fancy  for  a  hard-hearted  mistress — 
Shakespeare's  Rosaline — to  which  Da  Porto  only  alludes. 
An  elder  friend — Shakespeare's  Benvolio — advises  the 
enamoured  youth  to  '  examine  other  beauties,'  and  to 
subdue  his  passion.  Romeo  enters  Capulet's  mansion 
disguised,  but  no  longer  as  a  nymph.  The  Count  of 
Lodrone  is  now  first  known  as  Paris.  The  ladder  of 
ropes  is  now  first  mentioned.  The  sleeping  potion  is 
taken  by  Juliet,  not  in  presence  of  her  chamber-maid 
and  aunt,  but  in  solitude.  Friar  Lorenzo's  messenger  to 
Mantua  fails  to  deliver  the  letter  because  he  is  detained 
in  a  house  suspected  of  being  stricken  with  plague.  In 
particular  we  owe  to  Bandello  the  figure  of  the  nurse, 
not  Shakespeare's  humorous  creation,  but  a  friendly  old 
woman,  who  very  willingly  plays  her  part  of  go-between 
for  the  lovers.  One  more  development  and  all  the 
materials  of  Shakespeare's  play  are  in  full  formation. 
From  Bandello's  mention  of  one  Spolentino  of  Mantua, 
from  whom  Romeo  procures  the  poison,  Pierre  Boisteau 
creates  the  episode  of  the  Apothecary,  and  it  is  also  to 
this  French  refashioner  of  the  story  that  we  must  trace 
the  Shakespearian  close;  with  him,  Juliet  does  not  wake 


xxviii  INTRODUCTION 

from  her  sleep  until  Romeo  has  ceased  to  breathe ;  and 
she  dies,  as  in  our  tragedy,  not  in  a  paroxysm  of 
grief,  but  by  her  own  hand,  armed  with  her  husband's 
dagger."  *• 

The  Quartos  and  Folios  do  not  divide  Romeo  and 
Juliet  into  acts  and  scenes.  Mr.  Daniel  suggests  that 
Act  III.  should  end  with  scene  iv.,  making  Act  IV.  begin 
with  the  parting  of  the  lovers.  "  The  interposition,"  he 
writes,  "  of  the  short  scene  iv.  alone,  between  the  arrange- 
ment made  at  the  Friar's  Cell  for  the  meeting  of  the 
lovers  and  the  scene  in  which  they  part,  does  not  give  a 
sufficiently  marked  interval  for  the  occurrence  of  all  the 
events  which  are  supposed  to  have  passed  in  the  in- 
terim :  moreover  the  addition  of  scene  v.  to  Act  III.  has 
the  disadvantage  of  making  that  act  inordinately  long. 
Capell  made  the  division  I  here  suggest ;  but  his  example 
does  not  appear  to  have  been  followed  by  any  subsequent 
editor."  The  suggestion  seems  to  me  well  worthy  of 
consideration,  and  I  may  call  attention  to  the  fact  that 
in  O  i  the  first  of  those  ornamental  dividing  marks  which 
appear  on  several  of  the  later  pages  occurs  at  this  point. 
The  same  ornamental  division  occurs  in  the  scene  of  the 
lovers'  parting  at  the  entrance  of  Juliet's  mother,  and, 
I  think,  it  was  intended  that  there  should  here  be  a 
change  of  scene.  It  appears  again  at  the  close  of  our 
present  Act  in.,  at  the  close  of  iv.  i.,  the  close  of  iv.  ii., 

1  Transcripts  and  Studies,  pp.  389-390.  To  the  study  from  which  I 
quote  I  may  refer  the  reader  for  an  account  of  Lope  dc  Vega's  Castehrines 
y  Monteses  and  of  Los  Bandos  dc  Verona,  by  Francisco  dc  Rojas  y 
Zorrilla  (both  of  which  may  be  read  in  privately  printed  translations  by  .Mr. 
F.  W.  Cosens).  The  strange  conjunction  of  Shakespeare's  lovers  with 
Dante's  Ugolino  in  the  Romeo  el  Juliette  of  Ducis  is  also  noticed  in  the 
same  study. 


INTRODUCTION  xxix 

the  close  of  IV.  iii.,  the  close  of  iv.  iv.,  the  close  of  v.  i., 
the  close  of  v.  ii.,  in  v.  iii.  immediately  before  the  entrance 
of  the  Friar,  and  again  immediately  after  Juliet's  death. 
The  use  of  the  mark  is  evidently  not  accidental  or 
careless. 

The  dramatic  time  is  carefully  noted  throughout  the 
play,  but  presents  one  inexplicable  difficulty.  The  action 
opens  early  on  Sunday  morning;  after  the  street  fray 
when  Romeo  and  Benvolio  meet,  it  has  but  "  new  struck 
nine."  The  afternoon  has  come  when  Romeo  reads  the 
list  of  Capulet's  invited  guests  ;  at  night  the  "  old  accus- 
tomed feast  "  is  held,  and  Romeo  after  the  feast  hears 
Juliet's  confession  of  love  at  the  window.  Early  on 
Monday  morning  Romeo  visits  Friar  Laurence ;  at  noon 
he  jests  with  Mercutio,  and  informs  Juliet  through  the 
Nurse  that  the  marriage  shall  be  celebrated  that  after- 
noon. The  lovers  arc  married ;  the  encounter  with 
Tybalt,  "  that  an  hour  hath  been  my  cousin,"  follows. 
The  sentence  of  banishment  is  pronounced  ;  but  it  is 
arranged  that  the  new  husband  and  wife  shall  spend 
their  bridal  night  together.  At  dawn  on  Tuesday  morn- 
ing Romeo  parts  from  Juliet.  Capulet  on  the  preceding 
night  had  fixed  the  marriage  with  Paris  for  Thursday  ; 
he  now  rages  and  threatens  Juliet;  she  visits  the  Friar, 
who  gives  her  the  sleeping  potion  ;  she  returns,  seems  to 
acquiesce  in  her  parents'  wishes,  and  the  hasty  Capulet 
resolves  that  she  shall  be  taken  at  her  word,  and  married 
to  Paris  to  -  morrow  (Wednesday)  morning.  At  some 
hour  of  the  night  of  Tuesday  Juliet  drinks  the  potion. 
Old  Capulet  bustles  during  the  night  in  preparations 
for  the  wedding — "  the  curfew-bell  hath  rung,  'tis  three 


xxx  INTRODUCTION 

o'clock."  On  Wednesday  morning  Juliet  is  found  in 
seeming  death  ;  the  Friar  arrives  at  the  hour  prefixed 
for  marriage ;  all  is  turned  from  a  wedding  to  a  funeral ; 
Juliet  is  laid  in  the  tomb  of  her  ancestors.  At  a  later 
hour  of  what  seems  to  be  the  same  day  (Wednesday), 
Balthasar  informs  Romeo  of  his  wife's  death ;  Romeo 
obtains  the  poison,  sets  out  for  Verona,  at  night  enters 
the  monument  by  torch- light,  and  dies  beside  his  beloved. 
Friar  Laurence  "  at  the  prefixed  hour  of  her  waking " 
arrives  to  take  Juliet  from  the  vault ;  she  stabs  herself 
and  dies ;  the  Prince,  called  from  his  morning's  rest, 
enters,  and  on  Thursday  at  an  early  hour  the  action 
closes.1 

The  rapidity  of  the  whole  conduct  of  the  action  is 
surprising ;  yet,  up  to  the  night  on  which  Juliet  swallows 
the  Friar's  potion,  there  can  be  no  question  as  to  the 
dating  of  days  and  hours.  At  this  point  Shakespeare 
creates  a  difficulty  that  seems  to  be  insuperable.  He 
had  probably  noticed  in  Painter's  version  of  the  tale  a 
statement  of  the  Friar  that  the  opiate  effects  of  the  drug 
were  to  continue  for  "  the  space  of  forty  hours  at  the 
least."  As  if  to  be  more  precise  Shakespeare  names  the 
period  as  "  two  and  forty  hours."  From  what  time  of 
the  night  of  Tuesday  will  forty-two  succeeding  hours 
bring  us  to  a  very  early  morning  hour  (the  month  is 
July)  of  either  Thursday  or  Friday?  The  period  is  too 
short  to  suit  Friday  morning,  too  long  for  Thursday. 
We  should  not  trouble  ourselves  about  what  might  be 


1  See,  together  with  Daniel's  "  Time- Analysis  of  the  Plots  of  Shake- 
speare's Plays"  (New  Sh.  Society  s  Transactions,  1879),  the  notes  on  p.  202 
and  p.  219  of  Mr.  Rolfe's  edition  of  Romeo  and  Juliet. 


INTRODUCTION  xxxi 

explained  as  a  mere  stage-illusion  of  time,  if  Shakespeare 
had  required  such  a  stage-illusion,  or  if  he  had  not  elated 
the   events    throughout    with    more   exactness    than    the 
stage   requires.      In    Painter   the    Friar    directs   Juliet   to 
drink  the  potion   "  the   night   before  your   marriage  or  in 
the  morning  before   day  "  ;   in    Brooke,  "  on   thy  marriage 
day  before  the  sun  do  clear  the  sky."      Can  Shakespeare 
at  one  time  have  intended   that  Juliet's   soliloquy  should 
represent   the   passions   of  a  whole   night,  and   that  she 
should  not  swallow  the  opiate  until  a  short  time  before 
the  Nurse   came   to   rouse   her  in   order  that  she  should 
prepare   for   the   marriage   ceremony  ?      And  was  she  to 
return  to  consciousness  in   the   first  glimmering  of  a  July 
dawn,  as  soon  after  midnight  as  that  might  be,  on  the 
morning  of  Friday  ?      The   theory  is   in    many  ways  un- 
satisfactory,   but   the    mere   passage   of  hours    during   a 
soliloquy   need    not   present    a    difficulty  to    the  student 
of    Shakespeare.       In    Cymbeline    it    is    midnight    when 
Imogen    is    seized    by   sleep ;    lachimo    comes    from  the 
trunk,  soliloquises,  and   the   clock   strikes   three.     Yet  it 
can  hardly  be  supposed  that   Shakespeare   ever  intended 
that  Juliet  should  conjure  up  the  vision  of  the  slaughtered 
Tybalt  in  the  full  light  of  morning.      Perhaps  the  simplest 
explanation  of  the  difficulty  is  to  admit  that  it  was  never 
meant  to  be   explained  ;   forty-two   hours   gave   an   air  of 
precision  and   verisimilitude   to   the   Friar's  arrangement ; 
it  sufficed  to  cover  two    periods  of  night  preceding  two 
Italian    summer    dawns ;    and    the    dramatist    knew   that 
spectators  in  the  theatre  do  not  regulate  their  imagination 
by  a  chronometer. 

Unlike   the    play    of  Hamlet,    Romeo  and  Juliet  has 


xxxii  INTRODUCTION 

little  of  imaginative  mystery.  The  chief  subject  of 
difference  among  its  critics  concerns  what  we  may  call 
the  ethics  of  the  play.1  "  By  Friar  Laurence,"  writes 
Gervinus,  "  who,  as  it  were,  represents  the  part  of  the 
chorus  in  this  tragedy,  the  leading  idea  of  the  piece  is 
expressed  in  all  fulness,  an  idea  that  runs  throughout  the 
whole,  that  excess  in  any  enjoyment,  however  pure  in 
itself,  transforms  its  sweet  into  bitterness,  that  devotion 
to  any  single  feeling,  however  noble,  bespeaks  its  ascend- 
ency ;  that  this  ascendency  moves  the  man  and  woman 
out  of  their  natural  spheres  ;  that  love  can  only  be  a 
companion  in  life,  and  cannot  fill  out  the  life  and  business 
of  the  man  especially  ;  that  in  the  full  power  of  its  first 
rising,  it  is  a  paroxysm  of  happiness,  which,  according  to 
its  nature,  cannot  continue  in  equal  strength ;  that,  as 
the  poet  says  in  an  image,  it  is  a  flower  that, 

'  Being  smelt,  with  that  part  cheers  each  part ; 
Being  tasted,  slays  all  senses  with  the  heart."' 

And  the  critic   pursues  his  well-meant  moralisings  in  the 
same  spirit. 

Much  nearer  the  mark  was  Goethe  in  his  arrange- 
ment of  Romeo  and  Jiiliet  for  the  Weimar  theatre, 
i  Si  i:  "Before  Juliet  revives,"  in  Goethe's  recast,  "  the 
Friar  confesses  that  all  his  cunning  wisdom  was  in  vain  ; 
that  if  he  had  opposed,  instead  of  aiding  the  lovers, 
things  could  not  have  come  to  a  worse  end.  After 

1  The  commonplace  moralisings  and  the  vigorous  Protestant  feeling 
expressed  by  Brooke  in  his  address  "To  the  Reader,"  prefixed  to  Ronieiis 
and  Juliet,  did  not  influence  Shakespeare  ;  and  they  do  not  enter  into  P>rooke's 
poem,  where  the  hero  and  heroine  are  not  represented  as  "  thralling  them- 
selves to  unhonest  desire,"  and  the  "superstitious  frier"  appears  as  an 
amiable  old  student  of  natural  science. 


INTRODUCTION  xxxiii 

Juliet  has  stabbed  herself  Friar  Laurence  acknowledges 
the  folly  that  often  attends  the  wisdom  of  the  wise,  that 
to  attempt  to  do  good  is  often  more  dangerous  than  to 
undertake  to  do  evil.  Happy  those  whose  love  is  pure, 
because  both  love  and  hatred  lead  but  to  the  grave."  l 

That  is  to  say,  the  amiable  critic  of  life  as  seen  from 
the  cloister  does  not  understand  life  or  hate  or  love  ;  he 
is  not  the  chorus  of  the  tragedy,  but  an  actor  whose 
wisdom  is  of  a  kind  which  may  easily  lead  himself  and 
others  astray.  Garrick  was  not  an  eminent  moralist, 
but  there  is  more  of  truth  in  the  Prince's  rhymed  tag, 
with  which  Garrick's  version  of  the  tragedy  concludes, 
than  can  be  found  in  the  ponderous  moralities  of 
Gervinus  : 

Well  may  you  mourn  my  Lords,  (now  wise  too  late;> 
These  tragic  issues  of  your  mutual  hate  : 
From  private  feuds,  what  dire  misfortunes  flow  ; 
Whate'er  the  cause,  the  sure  effect  is  Woe. 

The  tragic  issues  are  the  results  not  of  love,  but  of  love 
growing  on  the  hatred  of  the  houses.  Shakespeare  has 
set  forth  this  in  the  opening  scene,  half  humorous  yet 
wholly  tragic.  He  reiterates  his  statement  of  the  fact 
at  the  close.  Romeo  and  Juliet  die  as  sacrifices  to 
appease  the  insane  fury,  out  of  which  their  lives  had 
risen  and  in  which  they  had  no  individual  part ;  therefore 
shall  their  statues  be  raised,  and  in  "  pure  gold  "  : 

Mon.  There  shall  no  figure  at  such  rate  be  set 

As  that  of  true  and  faithful  Juliet. 
Cap.  As  rich  shall  Romeo  by  his  lady  lie  ; 

Poor  sacrifices  of  our  enmity  ! 

1  Furness,  Koinio  anil /ulict,  p.  445. 


xxxiv  INTRODUCTION 

And  thus  the  dead  lovers  have  become  immortal 
victors. 

Shakespeare  did  not  intend  to  represent  more  than 
a  fragment  of  human  life  in  the  tragedy.  He  did  not 
aim  at  a  criticism  of  the  whole  of  human  character ; 
he  cared  to  show  us  his  hero  and  his  heroine  only  as 
lovers,  and  as  exemplary  in  the  perfection  of  their  love ; 
faithful  even  unto  death  ;  choosing,  with  a  final  election 
of  the  heart,  love  at  all  costs.  Here  is  no  view  of  the 
whole  of  life  ;  we  are  shown  merely  what  befell  a  young 
pair  of  lovers  during  four  days  long  ago  in  Verona.  But 
Shakespeare  felt,  and  we  all  feel,  that  if  such  love  as 
theirs  can  be  taken  up  into  a  complete  character,  modified 
and  controlled  by  the  other  noble  qualities  which  go  to 
form  a  large  and  generous  nature,  the  world  will  be  the 
better  for  such  pure  and  sacred  passion.  Such,  it  appears 
to  me,  are  the  ethics  of  the  play. 

And  the  personages  by  whom  the  lovers  are  encircled 
are  so  conceived  as  to  become  the  critics  of  ideal  love 
from  their  several  points  of  view,  honouring  and  exalting 
it  by  the  inadequacy  of  their  criticism.  To  old  Capulet, 
in  his  mood,  it  seems  that  the  passions  of  the  heart  are 
to  be  determined  by  parental  authority.  To  Lady 
Capulet  marriage  is  an  affair  of  worldly  convenience. 
To  the  Nurse  it  is  the  satisfaction  of  a  pleasurable 
instinct.  Mercutio,  a  gallant  friend,  is  too  brilliant  in 
his  intellectuality  to  be  capable  of  a  passion  in  which  the 
heart  shows  that  it  is  superior  to  the  brain ;  he  mocks 
at  love,  not  because  he  really  scorns  it,  but  because 
he  is  remote  from  it,  and  cherishes  before  all  else  his 
free-lance  liberty.  The  Friar  views  human  passion  from 


INTRODUCTION  xxxv 

the  quietudes  of  the  cloister,  or  from  amid  the  morning 
dew  of  the  fields ;  but  botany  is  not  the  science  of 
human  life.  Even  Romeo's  earlier  self,  with  his  amorous 
melancholy,  becomes  the  critic  of  his  later  self,  when 
a  true  and  final  election  has  been  made,  and  when  love 
has  become  the  risen  sun  of  his  day.  As  for  Juliet, 
her  words — 

My  bounty  is  as  boundless  as  the  sea, 
My  love  as  deep  ;  the  more  I  give  to  thee, 
The  more  I  have,  for  both  are  infinite, 

may  serve  for  an  inscription  beneath  that  statue  of 
pure  gold  of  which  Shakespeare  was  the  artist. 

It   may  interest  some  readers  to  have  before  them 
the  dialogue,  in   the  eighteenth-century  taste,  of  Romeo 
and  Juliet  in  the  tomb,  as  it  reached  our  ancestors, — 
somewhat    modish    ancestors    perhaps,— and   drew   forth 
their  tears,  in  the  version  of  Garrick. 

Rom.  Soft — she  breathes,  and  stirs  !  [Juliet  wakes. 

Jit!.  Where  am  I  ?   defend  me  powers  ! 

Rom.  She  speaks,  she  lives  :    and  we  shall  still  be  bless'd 
My  kind  propitious  stars  o'er  pay  me  now 
For  all  my  sorrows  past — rise,  rise,  my  Juliet, 
And  from  this  cave  of  death,  this  house  of  horror, 
Quick  let  me  snatch  thee  to  thy   Romeo's  arms, 
There  breathe  a  vital  spirit  in  thy  lips, 
And  call  thee  back  to  life  and  love.  \_Takes  Jicr  hand. 

Jitl.   Bless  me!    how  cold  it  is!    who's  there! 

Rom.  Thy  husband, 

:Tis  thy  Romeo,  Juliet  ;    rais'd  from  despair 

To  joys  unutt'rable  !    quit,  quit  this  place, 

And  let  us  fly  together —  \_Brings  Jicr  from  tlic  tomb. 

Jill.  Why  do  you  force  me  so — I  '11  ne'er  consent — 

My  strength  may  fail  me,  but  my  will 's  unmov'd, — 
I  '11  not  wed  Paris, — Romeo  is  my  husband — 

Rom.  Her  senses  are  unsettled — Heav'n  restore  'em  ! 


xxxvi  INTRODUCTION 

Romeo  is  thy  husband  ;  I  am  that  Romeo, 
Nor  all  the  opposing  pow'rs  of  earth  or  man, 
Shall  break  our  bonds,  or  tear  thee  from  my  heart. 

JuL  I  know  that  voice — Its  magic  sweetness  wakes 
Aly  tranced  soul — I  now  remember  well 
Each  circumstance — Oh  my  lord,  my  husband — 

\Going  to  embrace  him. 

Dost  thou  avoid  me,  Romeo  ?   let  me  touch 
Thy  hand,  and  taste  the  cordial  of  thy  lips — 
You  fright  me — speak — Oh  let  me  hear  some  voice 
Besides  my  own  in  this  drear  vault  of  death, 
Or  I  shall  faint — support  me  — 

Rom.  Oh  I  cannot, 

I  have  no  strength,  but  want  thy  feeble  aid. 
Cruel  poison  ! 

JuL  Poison  !    what  means  my  lord  ;  thy  trembling  voice  ! 
Pale  lips!   and  swimming  eyes!    death's  in  thy  face! 

Rom.  It  is  indeed — I  struggle  with  him  now — 

The  transports  that  I  felt  to  hear  thee  speak, 
And  see  thy  op'ning  eyes,  stopt  for  a  moment 
His  impetuous  course,  and  all  my  mind 
Was  happiness  and  thee  ;   but  now  the  poison 
Rushes  thro'  my  veins — I  'vc  not  time  to  tell — 
Fate  brought  me  to  this  place — to  take  a  last, 
Last  farewel  of  my  love,  and  with  thee  die. 

Jul.  Die  ?   was  the  Friar  false  ! 

Rom.  I  know  not  that — 

I  thought  thee  dead  :   distracted  at  the  sight, 
(Fatal  speed)  drank  poison,  kiss'd  thy  cold  lips, 
And  found  within  thy  arms  a  precious  grave — 
But  in  that  moment — Oh — 

Jul.  And  did  I   wake  for  this  '. 

Rom.  My  powers  arc  blasted, 

'Twixt  death  and  love  I'm  torn-    I  am  distracted! 
But  death's  strongest — and  must  I  leave  thee  Juliet! 
Oh  cruel  cursed  fate  !    in  sight  of  heav'n — 

Jul.  Thou  rav'st — lean  on  my  breast — • 

Rom.  Fathers  have  flinty  hearts,  no  tears  can  melt  'em. 
Nature  pleads  in  vain — Children  must  be  wretched — 

Jul.  Oh  my  breaking  heart — 

Rom.  She  is  my  wife — our  hearts  are  twin'd  together — 
Capulet  forbear — Paris,  loose  your  hold — 


INTRODUCTION  xxxvii 

Pull  not  our  heart-strings  thus — they  crack — they  break — 
Oh  Juliet!    Juliet!  [Dies. 

Jul.  Stay,  stay  for  me,  Romeo — 

A  moment  stay  ;   fate  marries  us  in  death, 
And  we  are  one— no  pow'r  shall  part  us. 

[Faints  on  Romeds  body. 

It  is  wonderful  what  a  good  situation  and  a  great 
actor  can  do  upon  the  stage,  even  with  words  such  as 
these.  Perhaps  all  of  us  who  are  capable  of  tears 
would  have  moistened  kerchiefs  in  presence  of  the  dying 
woes  of  Mr.  Garrick,  or  Mr.  Barry  and  Mrs.  Gibber. 

I  have  come  upon  some  illustrations  of  the  text,  in 
my  recent  reading,  too  late  for  embodiment  in  my  notes  ; 
a  few  of  these  may  be  here  set  down. 

I.  i.  79  :  Give  me  my  long  sivord.  Gompare  Sharpham, 
The  Fleire:  "the  gentleman  that  wore  the  long  Sword, 
now  weares  the  short  Hanger." 

T.  ii.  25  :  Earth-treading  stars.  Adopted  by  Sharpham, 
Cupid's  Whirligig  (opening  scene) :  "  the  Court,  where  so 
many  Earth-treading  starres  adornes  the  Skye  of  State." 

I.  v.  69  :  He  bears  him  like  a  portly  gentleman.  So 
Middleton,  Your  Five  Gallants,  iv.  viii. :  "  That  one  so 
fortunate  amongst  us  five  Shall  bear  himself  more  portly" 

I.  v.  122:  the  sport  is  at  t/ic  best.     Compare  Chapman, 
The  Gentleman   Usher  (Pearson's   reprint,  i.   260):  "Our 
hunting  sport  is  at  the  best." 

II.  i.    10:  Ay   me.      This   is   the  "sigh"   of  line   8,   as 
"love"  and  "dove "are  the  rhyme.     Compare  Sharpham, 
The  Fleire:  "Pis.  ay  me!      Aran.   Faith  my  Lord  you '1 
nere  win  a  woman  by  sighing." 

II.  i.  38  :  et  cetera.  So  used  for  an  unbecoming  omitted 
word  by  William  Haughton  in  Englishmen  for  my  Money. 


xxxviii  INTRODUCTION 

II.  iv.  109:  Here's  goodly  gear!  So  Chapman,  An 
humerous  dayes  mirth  (Pearson's  reprint,  i.  76) :  "  But  here 
is  goodly  geare." 

II.  v.  42 :  body,  etc.     Compare  Middleton  (ed.  Bullen), 
vol.  i.  27,  and  iii.  98. 

in.  i.  8:  operation  of  the  second  cup.  So  Sharpham, 
The  Fleire :  "  the  operation  of  the  pot  makes  him  not  able 
to  stand." 

in.  iii.  57  :  Hang  up  philosophy  !  Was  this  proverbial  ? 
Compare  W.  Haughton,  Englishmen  for  my  Money  (near 
opening  of  play) :  "  Hang  up  Philosophy,  He  none  of  it." 

III.  v.  9:  Night's  candles  are  burnt  out.     So  Haughton, 
Englishmen,  etc. : 

Night's  Candles  burne  obscure,  and  the  pale  Moone 
Favouring  our  drift,  lyes  buried  in  a  Cloud. 

iv.  iv.  ii:  mouse-hunt.  Add,  in  support  of  Dyce's 
explanation,  Haughton,  Englishmen,  etc.  (spoken  of  an 
amorous  old  man) :  "  Here  's  an  old  Ferret  Pole-cat." 

iv.  v.  97 :  alt,  put  tip,  put  up.  So  Chapman,  The 
Gentleman  Usher  (Pearson's  reprint,  i.  355):  "  Umvorthic 
Lord,  put  up,"  i.e.  cease. 

The  references  to  other  plays  of  Shakespeare  than 
Romeo  and  Juliet  are  to  act,  scene,  line,  as  found  in  the 
Globe  Shakespeare. 

I  have  had  a  great  advantage  in  preparing  this  edition 
of  Romeo  and  Juliet  in  having  been  preceded  by  Mr. 
Daniel,  the  most  conscientious  and  scholarly  of  editors. 
I  have  to  thank  him  for  an  unpublished  note  on  I.  iii. 
33.  Professor  Littledale  communicated  to  me  some 
valuable  suggestions.  Dr.  Furnivall  called  my  attention 


INTRODUCTION  xxxix 

to  the  passage  of  Masson's  Milton  quoted  on  p.  82. 
But  my  chief  debt  is  to  my  friend  Mr.  W.  J.  Craig,  who, 
out  of  the  great  store  of  illustrations  of  Shakespeare 
which  during  many  years  he  has  accumulated,  generously 
furnished  me  with  a  wealth  of  quotations  which  I  have 
utilised  as  far  as  my  space  permitted.  Whatever  value 
this  edition  may  possess  is  in  large  measure  due  to  his 
learning  and  his  kindness. 


THE    TRAGEDY 


ROMEO    AND    JULIET 


DRAMATIS  PERSONAL 

ESCALUS,  Prince  of  Verona. 

PARIS,  a  young  Nobleman,  Kinsman  to  the  Prince. 

MONTAGUE.  )   T 

~  \  Heads  of  tiuo  Houses,  at  variance  with  each  other. 

CAPULET,      J 

An  old  man,  of  the  Capulet  family. 

ROMEO,  Son  to  Montague. 

MERCUTIO,  Kinsman  to  the  Prince,  and  Friend  to  Romeo. 

BENVOLIO,  Nephew  to  Montague,  and  Friend  to  Romeo. 

TYBALT,  Nephew  to  Lady  Capulet. 

FRIAR  LAURENCE,  a  Franciscan. 

FRIAR  JOHN,  of  the  same  Order. 

BALTHASAR,  Servant  to  Romeo. 

SAMPSON,   )   . 

^  >  Servants  to  Capulet. 

GREGORY,  J 

PETER,  Servant  to  Juliet 's  nurse. 

ABRAHAM,  Servant  to  Montague. 

An  Apothecary. 

Three  Musicians. 

Page  to  Paris  ;  another  Page  ;  an  Officer. 

LADY  MONTAGUE,  Wife  to  Montague. 
LADY  CAPULET,   Wife  to  Capulet. 
JULIET,  Daughter  to  Capulet. 
Nurse  to  Juliet. 

Citizens  of  Verona ;  Kinsfolk  of  both  Houses  ;  Maskers,  Guards, 
Watchmen,  and  Attendants. 

Chorus. 

SCENES  :    Verona  •  Mantua. 


THE    TRAGEDY 


ROMEO   AND    JULIET 


PROLOGUE 

Enter  CllORUS. 

Chor.  Two  households,  both  alike  in  dignity, 

In  fair  Verona,  where  we  lay  our  scene, 
From  ancient  grudge  break  to  new  mutiny, 

Where  civil  blood  makes  civil  hands  tmclean. 
From  forth  the  fatal  loins  of  these  two  foes 

A  pair  of  star-cross  d  lovers  take  their  life  ; 
Whose  misadventured  piteous  overthrows 

Do  with  their  death  bury  their  parents'  strife. 
The  fearful  passage  of  their  death- mark' d  love, 

And  the  continuance  of  their  parents'  rage, 

1-14  Prologue,  omitted  Ff.         S.  Do]  Rowe,  Doth  Q. 


IO 


Prologue]  This  prologue,  probably  serves  as  prologue  to  Heywood's  The 

spoken  by  the  actor  who  appears  as  Fain  JMaidc  of  the  Exchange,  printed 

Chorus  at  the  opening  of  Act  II.,  is  1607;    a    sonnet    (Shakespearian)    is 

written    in   the    form    of  the    Shake-  prologue    to    his    A    Woman    Killed 

spearian    sonnet ;    so   a    sonnet   (ap-  ivith  Kindness,  1607.     Here  the  note 

proaching  nearer  to  the  Italian  form)  of  fate  is  struck  in  lines  5,  6. 


4  ROMEO   AND  JULIET          [ACTI. 

Which,  but  their  children's  end,  nought  could  remove, 

Is  now  the  two  hours'  traffic  of  our  stage  ; 
The  which  if  you  with  patient  ears  attend, 
What  here  shall  miss,  our  toil  shall  strive  to  mend. 

[Exit. 

ACT  I 

SCENE   I. —  Verona.     A  public  Place. 

Enter  SAMPSON  and  GREGORY,  of  the  house  of  Capulct, 
with  swords  and  bucklers. 

Sam.   Gregory,  on  my  word,  \ve  '11  not  carry  coals. 
Gre.  No,  for  then  we  should  be  colliers. 
Sam.   I  mean,  an  we  be  in  choler,  we  '11  draw. 
Gre.   Ay,  while  you   live,  draw  your  neck   out  o'  the 

collar.  5 

Sam.   I  strike  quickly,  being  moved. 

14.  Exit]  Capell,  omitted  Q. 

Act  I.  Scene  i. 

Act  I.  Scene  I.  ]  No  marking  of  Acts  and  Scenes  in  O  ;  none  except  here 
in  F.  I.  on]  O,  A   F,  <?'   Capell.  3.  an]  Theobald,  and  Q,  if  F. 

4.  o1  the]  F,  0/Q. 

12.   two    hours'    traffic]     Compare  man  was  .    .   .   one  that  in  an  upright 

Henry  VIII,  Prologue,  12,  13:  "May  (juarrell  would  beare  no  coles." 

.see  away  their  shilling  Richly  in  two  2.  colliers]  New Eng.  Did.:  "Qfar\ 

short    hours."     The    simple   material  used  with  allusion   to  the  dirtiness  of 

apparatus  of    the    Elizabethan    stage  the  trade  in  coal,  or  the  evil  repute  of 

tended  to  accelerate  the  performance.  the  collier  for  cheating  :   cf.  Greene's 

Coosnas^e,   of   Colliers    (1591)."      See 

Act  I.  Scene  i.  Twelfth  Night,  m.  iv.  130.  ' 

I.   carry  coals]  submit   to  menials'  3.   choler]  The   play  on    "choler,'' 

work,     and     .so     to    humiliation    or  "collar,"    and      "draw"    occurs    in 

insult.    New    Eng.    Diet,    quotes  J.  Jonson's  Every  Man  in  his  Humour, 

Hooker,    Girald.   Ireland,  in   Holin-  ill.    ii.    (dialogue    between    Cob    and 

shed  (1586),   ii.    105:    "This  gentle-  Cash). 


sc.  i.j  ROMEO    AND   JULIET  5 

Gre.  But  thou  art  not  quickly  moved  to  strike. 

Sam.  A  dog  of  the  house  of  Montague  moves  me. 

Gre.   To   move   is   to  stir,   and    to   be   valiant   is   to 

stand;     therefore,    if    thou    art    moved,    thou      10 
runn'st  away. 

Sam.  A  dog  of  that  house  shall  move  me  to  stand : 
I  will  take  the  wall  of  any  man  or  maid  of 
Montague's. 

Gre.  That  shows  thee  a  weak  slave  ;  for  the  weakest      i  5 
goes  to  the  wall. 

Sam.  'Tis  true ;  and  therefore  women,  being  the 
weaker  vessels,  are  ever  thrust  to  the  wall : 
therefore  I  will  push  Montague's  men  from  the 
wall  and  thrust  his  maids  to  the  wall.  20 

Gre.  The  quarrel  is  between  our  masters  and  us 
their  men. 

Sam.  'Tis  all  one,  I  will  show  myself  a  tyrant : 
when  I  have  fought  with  the  men,  I  will  be 
cruel  with  the  maids  ;  I  will  cut  off  their  heads.  25 

Gre.  The  heads  of  the  maids  ? 

Sam.  Ay,  the  heads  of  the  maids,  or  their  maiden- 
heads ;  take  it  in  what  sense  thou  wilt. 

Gre.  They  must  take  it  in  sense  that  feel  it. 


10.   stand}  O  i  has  "  stand  to  it."  Mauley's    conjecture,    "not   us   their 

15,  16.   weakfft  .   .   .  wall]  A  pro-  men,"    is   unhappy.      Gregory   means 

verbial   saying;    so    Machin,    Dumb  that  masters  and  men,  but  not  women , 

Knight:    "  The  weakest  must  to  the  are  included  in  the  quarrel, 

wall  still."     A  play  of  1600  had  the  25.   cntcl}  Possibly  ciril  is  right,  a 

proverb  for  its  title.     See  ill.  iv.   12  tyrant's  civility  to  maids  showing  it- 

(note).  self,  as  Sampson  indicates,  in  a  seem- 

2i,  22.    The     ijuarrel  ,    .    .    men]  ing  paradox. 


6  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACT  i. 

Sam.  Me  they  shall  feel  while   I   am  able  to  stand ;      30 
and  'tis  known  I  am  a  pretty  piece  of  flesh. 

Gre.  'Tis  well  thou  art  not  fish ;  if  thou  hadst,  thou 
hadst  been  poor  John.  Draw  thy  tool ;  here 
comes  two  of  the  house  of  the  Montagues. 

Enter  ABRAHAM  and  BALTHASAR. 

Sam.   My  naked    weapon    is    out :    quarrel ;    I    will      3  5 

back  thee. 

Gre.   How  !   turn  thy  back  and  run  ? 
Sam.  Fear  me  not. 
Gre.  No,  marry  ;   I  fear  thee  ! 
Sam.  Let  us  take  the  law  of  our  sides  ;  let  them      40 

begin. 
Gre.   I  will  frown  as  I  pass  by,  and  let  them  take  it 

as  they  list. 
Sam.  Nay,  as  they  dare.      I  will  bite  my  thumb  at 

them;    which  is    a    disgrace    to  them,  if  they      45 

bear  it. 

Abr.  Do  you  bite  your  thumb  at  us,  sir? 
Sam.   I  do  bite  my  thumb,  sir. 

34.  two]  Q  I  ;  omitted  Q,  F;  house  of  the~\  F,  house  of  Q.  Enter  .  .  .] 
Ro\ve  ;  Enter  two  other  serving  men  Q,  F.  37.  win  '.'}  O,  run.  F. 
45.  a]  omitted  Q  (alone). 

31.  pretty  piece  of  flesh]  The  same  the  prefix  to  his  speeches.     His  silent 

expression  occurs  in  Much  Ado,   IV.  fellow  was  named  by  Rowe,  Balthasar 

ii.  85,  and  Love's  Cure,  ill.  iv.  16.  being  Romeo's  man. 

33.  poor  John]    hake,    dried    and  44.   bite  my  thumb]   Singer  quotes 
salted,      poor     and     coarse     eating ;  from    Cotgrave   a   description  of  this 
Massinger,  Renegado,  I.  i.  :    "  To  feed  mode  of  insult;   "  Fairs  la  nique  .   .   . 
upon  poor  John  when  I  see  pheasants  to   threaten   or  defie,   by  putting  the 
And  partridges  on  the  table.''  thumb  nail  into  the  mouth,  and  with  a 

34.  Enter  .   .   .   Abraham]    In    Q,     jerke  (from  the  upper  teeth)  make  it 
F,  "Enter  two  other  serving  men."     to  knacke." 

Abraham's  name  can  be  inferred  from 


sc.  i.J  ROMKO    AND    JULIKT  7 

Abr.   Do  you  bite  your  thumb  at  us,  sir? 

Sam.  {Aside  to    Gre.]    Is   the    la\v   of  our  side   if   I       50 

say  ay  ? 
Gre.   No. 
Sam.   No,  sir,  I   do  not   bite   my  thumb  at  you,  sir ; 

but  I  bite  my  thumb,  sir. 

Gre.   Do  you  quarrel,  sir  ?  55 

Abr.  Quarrel,  sir  !   no,  sir. 
Sam.   If  you  do,  sir,  I  am    for  you:    I  serve  as  good 

a  man  as  you. 
Abr.   No  better. 
Sam.  Well,  sir.  60 

Enter  BENVOLIO. 

Gre.  {Aside  to  Sam.']   Say  "  better  "  :   here  comes  one 

of  my  master's  kinsmen. 
Sam.  Yes,  better,  sir. 
Abr.  You  lie. 
Sam.  Draw,  if  you    be    men.      Gregory,  remember      65 

thy  swashing  blow.  \They  fight. 

Ben.   Part,  fools  !  \_Beating  doivn  their  ivcapons. 

Put    up    your    swords ;     you    know    not    what 

you  do. 


6r,  62.  one  of  my  master1  s  kins/nt-n}  /;/<;•  of  F,  O  is  possible.      Panicl  (who 

Tybalt  is  meant,  who  is  seen  approach-  reads  swas/ting]  quotes  Rich.  Harvey, 

ing.  Plahic  Pfirerall  ( 1 5$9)  :    ' '  A  washing 

66.   stvash  /;/;,•]  Jonson  \xi\ns  Staple  Mow  of  this  [a  quarter-staff]  is  as  good 

of  News,  v.   i..  has  "  I  do  eonfess  a  as   a    Laundresse."     Baret,  Ak'carie, 

swashing  blow  ";  and  in  As  You  Like  has   "to   swash   or   to   make   a   noise 

//,  i.  iii.  122,  we  have  ''a  swashing  with  swordes  against  tergats." 
and  a  martial  outside."    But  the  ivask- 


8  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACT  i 

Enter  TYBALT. 

Tyb.   What,    art     thou     drawn     among     these    heartless 
hinds?  70 

Turn  thee,  Benvolio,  look  upon  thy  death. 
Ben.   I  do  but  keep  the  peace :  put  up  thy  sword, 

Or  manage  it  to  part  these  men  with  me. 
Tyb.  What,  drawn,  and  talk  of  peace  !      I  hate  the  word, 

As  I  hate  hell,  all  Montagues,  and  thee:  75 

Have  at  thee,  coward  !  \They  fight. 

Enter  several  of  both  houses,  who  join  tJie  fray  ;   then 
enter  Citizens  and  Peace-officers,  with  clubs. 

First  Off.  Clubs,  bills,  and   partisans  !   strike  !   beat  them 

down  ! 
Down  with  the  Capulets!   down  with  the  Montagues  ! 

Enter  old  CAPULET  in  his  gown,  and  Lady  CAPULET. 

Cap.  What  noise  is  this  ?      Give  me  my  long  sword,  ho  ! 
Lady  Cap.  A    crutch,    a    crutch !     why    call    you    for    a 
sword  ?  80 

74.  drawn"}  Q,  draw  F  and  several  editors.  76.  Enter  .  .  .  clubs] 
Capell,  substantially  ;  Enter  three  or  foure  Citizens  with  Clubs  or  part ysons 
() ;  so  1-'.  omitting  "  or  partisans."  77.  First  Off'.]  Offi.  Q,  F ;  Cit.  Steevens  ; 
I  Cit.  Malone  ;  Citizens  Dyce. 

70.   heartless  kinds']  A  play  here  on  serve  the   public   peace."      Compare 

both  words ;  hind,  a  menial,  hind,  a  Henry    VIII.    \ .    iv.    53    and    Titus 

female  deer;  so  with  a  play  on  hart  And.    II.   i.    37. 

and  heart  in  Drayton,   Polyolbion,  v '.          77.   bills']  a  kind  of  pike  or  halbert 

228,  "heartless  deer."  used  by  constables  of  the  watch,  and 

77.   First  Off.]  So  Cambridge  edi-  by  foot-soldiers.     See  Ahich  Ado,  HI. 

tors,     who    conjecture    that    line    78  iii.  44. 
belongs  to  Citizens.  77.  partisans']  Fairholt :   "A  sharp 

77.  Clubs]  Dyce:  "Originally  the  two-edged  sword  placed  on  the  sum- 
cry  to  call  forth  the  London  appren-  mit  of  a  staff."  See  Hamlet,  I.  i, 
t  ices,  who  employed  their  clubs  to  pre-  1 40, 


sc.i.|  ROMEO    AND   JULIET  9 

Cap.   My  sword,  I  say  !      Old  Montague  is  come, 
And  flourishes  his  blade  in  spite  of  me. 

Enter  old  MONTAGUE  and  Lady  MONT.u;ui-:. 

Mon.   Thou  villain  Capulet ! — Mold  me  not ;   let  me  go. 
Lady  Mon.   Thou  shalt  not  stir  one  foot  to  seek  a  foe. 

Enter  Prince  ESCALUS,  with  his  Train. 

Prince.   Rebellious  subjects,  enemies  to  peace,  85 

Profaners  of  this  neighbour-stained  steel, — 
Will    they    not    hear  ?      What,    ho !    you    men,    you 

beasts, 

That  quench  the  fire  of  your  pernicious  rage 
With  purple  fountains  issuing  from  your  veins, 
On  pain  of  torture,  from  those  bloody  hands          90 
Throw  your  mistemper'd  weapons  to  the  ground, 
And  hear  the  sentence  of  your  moved  prince 
Three  civil  brawls,  bred  of  an  airy  word, 
By  thee,  old  Capulet,  and  Montague, 
Have  thrice  disturb'd  the  quiet  of  our  streets,        95 
And  made  Verona's  ancient  citizens 
Cast  by  their  grave  beseeming  ornaments, 
To  wield  old  partisans,  in  hands  as  old, 
Canker'd  with  peace,  to  part  your  canker'd  hate  : 


82.  in  spite  of  me}  in  despite  (scorn-  insert  hyphen  :  grave-beseeming,  i.e. 

ful  defiance)  of  me.  See  New  Eng.  1  >eseeming  gravity  ;  but  in  1  Henry  I' I. 

Diet,  "despite,"  5-  \".  i.  54,  \ve  find  "grave  ornaments.'' 

91.  mistemperd~\  wrathful,  or  per-  99.  Canker'd  .  .  .  hate]  The  first 

haps,  as  Schmidt  explains,  tempered  canker'd  means  corroded.  Compare 

to  an  ill  end.  Bible,  James  v.  3  :  "  Your  gold  and 

97.  gra~a  besicinin^\  Walker  would  silver    is    cankered,"       The    second 


10  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACT  i. 

If  ever  you  disturb  our  streets  again  100 

Your  lives  shall  pay  the  forfeit  of  the  peace. 

For  this  time,  all  the  rest  depart  away : 

You,  Capulet,  shall  go  along  with  me ; 

And,  Montague,  come  you  this  afternoon 

To  know  our  farther  pleasure  in  this  case,  105 

To  old  Free-town,  our  common  judgment-place. 

Once  more,  on  pain  of  death,  all  men  depart. 

{Exeunt  all  but  Montague,  Lady 
Montague,  and  Benvolio. 

Man.   Who  set  this  ancient  quarrel  new  abroach  ? 
Speak,  nephew,  were  you  by  when  it  began  ? 

Ben.   Here  were  the  servants  of  your  adversary  i  10 

And  yours  close  fighting  ere  I  did  approach : 
I  drew  to  part  them  ;   in  the  instant  came 
The  fiery  Tybalt,  with  his  sword  prepared, 
Which,  as  he  breathed  defiance  to  my  ears, 
He  swung  about  his  head,  and  cut  the  winds,      i  i  5 
Who,  nothing  hurt  withal,  hiss'd  him  in  scorn  : 
While  we  were  interchanging  thrusts  and  blows, 
Came  more  and  more,  and  fought  on  part  and  part, 
Till  the  prince  came,  who  parted  either  part. 

Lady  Mon.   O,    where    is    Romeo  ?     saw     you     him     to- 
day ?  i  20 
Right  glad  I  am  he  was  not  at  this  fray. 

Ben.   Madam,  an  hour  before  the  worshipp'd  sun 

105.  farther}    Q,  further  Q   5,   Fa/hers   O   3,   F.          108.    Mon.]   Q,    F; 
M:   wife  O  I.          121.  I  ant]  (^,  am  I  F. 

means  malignant,   as    in  King  John,  Capilef  s    castle ;    it    corresponds    to 

II.    i.    194:   "A    canker'd    grandam's  Villa  Franca  of  the  Italian  story, 
will!''  113.     prepared}     so       "prepared 

106.  Free-town}  This    in    Brooke's  sword,"  Lear,  II.  i.  53. 
Romeus   and  Juliet   is    the    name  of 


sc.  i.]  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  11 

Pccr'd  forth  the  golden  window  of  the  east, 

A  troubled  mind  drave  me  to  walk  abroad  ; 

Where,  underneath  the  grove  of  sycamore  125 

That  westward  rooteth  from  the  city's  side, 

So  early  walking  did  I  see  your  son  : 

Towards  him  I  made  ;   but  he  was  ware  of  me, 

And  stole  into  the  covert  of  the  wood  : 

I,  measuring  his  affections  by  my  own,  130 

Which  then  most  sought   where  most   might  not  be 

found, 

Being  one  too  many  by  my  weary  self, 
Pursued  my  humour,  not  pursuing  his, 
And  gladly  shunn'd  who  gladly  fled  from  me. 
Mon.   Many  a  morning  hath  he  there  been  seen,  135 

With  tears  augmenting  the  fresh  morning's  dew, 
Adding  to  clouds  more  clouds  with  his  deep  sighs  : 
But  all  so  soon  as  the  all-cheering  sun 
Should  in  the  farthest  east  begin  to  draw 
The  shady  curtains  from  Aurora's  bed,  140 

124.  drave}  F,  drive  Q.          126.  the  city  s}  O  i,  Malone  ;  this  city  Q,  F. 
133,  humour']  Q,  honour  F. 

123.  Peered  .   .   .  east}    Q     I     has  131.    Which  .   .   .  found}  Pope  and 
Pcept  for  Peerd.     An  echo  is  noted  several    editors    substitute    for    lines 
by    Holt  White  in   Summa    Tot  alls,  131,  132,  the  line  (from  Q  i):  "That 
1607:    "1'eepes    through    the    purple  most   are   busied,   when  they're  must 
windowes  of  the  East."  alone."      The    meaning   of  line    131 

124.  drave}  The  Q  drive  =  drave  is   Which  then   sought    in   chief   that 
is    retained    by    Mommsen,    and    ex-  place    where    there   was    least    resort 
amples  from  Spenser  and  Jonson  are  of  people.      Professor  G.   Allen  con, 
cited.      See    Daniel's    revised    ed.    of  jectures   "where    more  night   not   be 
O.      1  lere   O    I    reads,    "A    troubled  found."       "Shakespeare,"    he    says- 
thought  drew  me  from  companie."  "was   not    the    man    (in    Romeo  and 

125.  sycamore}      In     Uesdemona's  Juliet  at  least)  to  let  slip  the  chance 
song,  Othello,  \\ .  iii.  41,  the  deserted  of  running    through    the    Degrees    of 
lover   sits    "sighing    by   a   sycamore  Comparison,  many,  mart;,  most.''' 
tree.''     Furness  quotes  W.    \Vestma-  133.   his]  Theobald  adopted  Thirl- 
cott's  Scripture  Herbal :  "Astrologers  by's  conjecture  him. 

regard  it  as  one  of  Venus  her  trees.'1 


12  ROMEO    AND   JULIET          [ACT  i. 

Away  from  light  steals  home  my  heavy  son, 

And  private  in  his  chamber  pens  himself, 

Shuts  up  his  windows,  locks  fair  daylight  out, 

And  makes  himself  an  artificial  night. 

Black  and  portentous  must  this  humour  prove     145 

Unless  good  counsel  may  the  cause  remove. 

Ben,   My  noble  uncle,  do  you  know  the  cause  ? 

Mon.   I  neither  know  it  nor  can  learn  of  him. 

Ben.   Have  you  importuned  him  by  any  means  ? 

Mon.  Both  by  myself  and  many  other  friends  :  150 

But  he,  his  own  affections'  counsellor, 
Is  to  himself — I  will  not  say  how  true — 
But  to  himself  so  secret  and  so  close, 
So  far  from  sounding  and  discovery, 
As  is  the  bud  bit  with  an  envious  worm,  i  5  5 

Ere  he  can  spread  his  sweet  leaves  to  the  air, 
Or  dedicate  his  beauty  to  the  sun. 
Could    we    but     learn     from    whence    his    sorrows 

grow, 
We  would  as  willingly  give  cure  as  know. 

150.   other]  Q,  others  F.  157.   szm]  Pope,   cd.   2.    (Theobald) ;  same 

Q,  F. 

141.  son]  A  play  on  sun,  line  138,  157.   the  sun~\  Theobald's  emenda- 

and      son     is      probably     intended,  tion  has  won  its  way  against  the  read  - 

"heavy"    being    opposed    to     "all-  ing  of  Oq,   Ff,  by  virtue  of  its  beauty, 

cheering."  Malone,   who    prints  the  same  in  his 

150.  other  friends\  Knight,  insert-  text,  as  "a  mode  of  expression   not 

ing   a    comma    in    text    of    F,    reads  uncommon    in    Shakespeare's    time,'" 

others,  friends.      Daniel  observes  that  supports  the  sun   by  a  parallel  from 

Knight's  punctuation   may  be    right,  Daniel's  Sonnets  : 

but    other  —  frequently    used     as     a  "  And  whilst  thou  spreacfst  unto  the 

plural — would  agree   with   it  as  well  rising  sitnne 

as  others.  The  fairest_/7<?Ji't'r  that  ever  saw  the 

155.   envious}  malignant,     spiteful,  light, 

as  often.     The  image   of  the   worm  Now  joy  thy  time,  before  thy  sweet 

and  bud  occurs  with  like  significance  be  done." 
in  Twelfth  Night,  il.  iv.  114, 


sc.i.1  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  13 

Enter  ROMKO. 

Ben.  See  where  he  comes  :  so  please  you,  step  aside  ;  1 60 

I  '11  know  his  grievance,  or  be  much  denied. 
Mon.   I  would  thou  wert  so  happy  by  thy  stay, 

To  hear  true  shrift.      Come,  madam,  let 's  away. 

\Exeunt  Montague  and  Lady. 
Ben.  Good  morrow,  cousin. 

Rom.  Is  the  day  so  young? 

Ben.   But  new  struck  nine. 
Rom.  Ay  me!   sad  hours  seem  long.    165 

Was  that  my  father  that  went  hence  so  fast  ? 
Ben.   It  was.      What  sadness  lengthens  Romeo's  hours  ? 
Rom.  Not  having  that,  which,  having,  makes  them  short. 
Ben.   In  love  ? 

Rom.  Out —  170 

Ben.   Of  love? 

Rom.  Out  of  her  favour,  where  I  am  in  love. 
Ben.  Alas,  that  love,  so  gentle  in  his  view, 

Should  be  so  tyrannous  and  rough  in  proof! 
Rom.   Alas,  that  love,  whose  view  is  muffled  still,         175 

Should  without  eyes  see  pathways  to  his  will  ! 

Where   shall   we    dine  ?      O   me !      What    fray   was 
here  ? 

Yet  tell  me  not,  for  I  have  heard  it  all. 

169.    In   lore?]  O    5,    In  IOTC.    The   rest.  170.    Out — J    Ro\vc  ;    Out. 

Q,  F.          171.    OJ  ioi-c.J]  Q  5,  Of  loz-c.  The  rest. 

176.   Should   .    .    .     will']    Romeo  pathwaies   to   our    \sill,''   ;'.<•.    lawlc.-s 

laments  that  love,  though  blindfolded,  himself  should  rule  our  passions, 
should  see  how   to  reach   the  lover's          177.   dinc?\    A    lover,     of    course, 

heart.       Staunton      needlessly      con-  could  not  seriously  think  of  his  dinner, 

jectures  "set  pathways  to  our  will,"  Romeo  wishes  to  turn  aside  Benvolio's 

i.e.  prescribe  to  us  our  passion.     Q  i  inquiries. 
reads,    "  Should  without   lawes   give 


14  ROMEO    AND   JULIET  [ACT  i. 

Here 's  much  to  do  with  hate,  but  more  with  love  : 
Why  then,  O  brawling  love  !      O  loving  hate  !    i  80 
O  any  thing,  of  nothing  first  created  ! 
O  heavy  lightness  !   serious  vanity  ! 
Misshapen  chaos  of  well-seeming  forms  ! 
Feather  of  lead,  bright  smoke,  cold  fire,  sick  health  ! 
Still-waking  sleep,  that  is  not  what  it  is  !  185 

This  love  feel  I,  that  feel  no  love  in  this. 
Dost  thou  not  laugh  ? 

Ben.  No,  coz,  I  rather  weep. 

Rom.  Good  heart,  at  what  ? 

Ben.  At  thy  good  heart's  oppression. 

Rom.  WThy,  such  is  love's  transgression. 

Griefs  of  mine  own  lie  heavy  in  my  breast,         1 90 
Which  thou  wilt  propagate  to  have  it  prest 
With  more  of  thine :  this  love  that  thou  hast  shown 
Doth  add  more  grief  to  too  much  of  mine  own. 
Love  is  a  smoke  raised  with  the  fume  of  sighs ; 
Being  purged,  a  fire  sparkling  in  lovers'  eyes;     195 

181.  created]  Q,  F  ;  create  Q  I,  Ff  2-4,  and  many  editors.  183.  Well- 
seeming'}  Qq  4,  5,  Ff.  2-4;  -well-seeing  The  rest;  best  seeming  things  Q  i, 
191.  it}  Q,  F;  them  Q  I.  194.  raised}  Q  I  and  many  editors;  made 

Q,  F. 


189.    Why  .  . 

Rosaline   is    of   the    Capulet   family ;  short    line  is    variously  eked    out    by 

see  I.  ii.  70.  editors.     Collier  (MS.)  reads,   "Why 

180-185]  This    conventional    char-  such,  Benvolio,  is." 

acterisation  of  love  by  the  identity  of         191.  prest]  The  word  has  reference 

contradictories    could    be    illustrated  to  Benvolio's  \\oid.  oppression,  line  188. 

endlessly    from     Elizabethan    sonnet-  Might   we   read  to  have't  oppressed? 

teers    and   earlier   poets   English  and  Q   I,  which  in  line   190  reads  at  my 

foreign.       Romeo     speaks    otherwise  hart,    has  wouldst  propagate  to   haz'e 

when   his  heart   is   deeply  moved   by  them  prest. 
Juliet.  192.  this  love}  Q  I  reads  this  griefe 

181.  created}  Perhaps  the  rhyming  • — probably,    says  Daniel,    the    better 

create  of  Q  I  is  right.  reading. 

185.  Still-waking]  constantly  wak-         195.  purged]  love  purified  from  the 

ing.  smoke.     Johnson  plausibly  suggested 


sc.  i.]  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  15 

Being  vex'd,  a  sea  nourish'd  with  lovers'  tears ; 

What  is  it  else  ?  a  madness  most  discreet, 

A  choking  gall,  and  a  preserving  sweet. 

Farewell,  my  coz. 
Ben.  Soft !    I  will  go  along  ; 

An  if  you  leave  me  so,  you  do  me  wrong.  200 

Rom.  Tut,  I  have  lost  myself;   I  am  not  here  ; 

This  is  not  Romeo,  he  's  some  other  where. 
Ben.  Tell  me  in  sadness,  who  is  that  you  love. 
Rom.  What,  shall  I  groan  and  tell  thee  ? 
Ben.  Groan  !   why,  no  ; 

But  sadly  tell  me  who.  205 

Rom.   Bid  a  sick  man  in  sadness  make  his  will : 

Ah,  word  ill  urged  to  one  that  is  so  ill ! 

In  sadness,  cousin,  I  do  love  a  woman. 
Ben.   I  aim'd  so  near  when  I  supposed  you  loved. 
Rom.  A    right    good    mark  -  man !      And    she 's    fair    I 
love.  210 

196.  /avers']  a  lovers  Q  I  ;  lovers  Pope  ;  loving  Q,  F.  200.  An~\ 
Ilanmcr;  And  Q,  F.  206.  Bid  .  .  .  make'}  Qq  I,  4,  5;  A  siekc  .  .  . 
makes  Qq  2,  3,  F  ;  later  Ff  emend  F  by  inserting  good  before  sadness. 
207.  Ah,  word}  Q  i,  Malone,  and  other  editors;  A  word  Q,  F,  and  several 
editors  ;  0,  word  Ff  2-4. 

urged  ;   "to  urge  the  fire  is  a  technical  long  s  the  words  were  easily  mistaken 

term,''    which    occurs    in    Chapman's  fur  each  other.     Allen  notes  that    in 

liiad,  xxi.     Collier  (MS.)  has  piifTd.  Corioianus,  \.  iv.  54,   "Thou  art  /iff, 

White    fancies    a    scriptural   allusion  Marcius,"'  we    should    probably    re. id 

(Matt.  iii.  12)  to  the  fan  purging  the  "lost."'     Daniel  adds  that  in  Hamlet, 

door.  III.  i.  99,    "their  perfume  lost"  (Qq) 

196.   a   sea  .   .   .  tears}  Q    I    reads  is  misprinted  left  in  Ff. 
"  a  sea  raging  with  a  lover's  teares."  203.  sadness}  seriousnes?,   as  often 

198.  preserving]   The    line    means  in   Shakespeare.      In    Romeo's  groan 

that   love  kills  and  keeps  alive,   is  a  he  plays  upon  the  meaning  "grief.'' 

bane  and  an  antidote.      Hazlitl's/Yv-  Q  I  reads,  "  whome  she  is  you  love,  ' 

severing  misses  the  point.  altered  by  editors  to  who. 

201.  lost}  I  am  much   inclined   to         203.   is]  Daniel,  retaining  from  Q, 

agree  with   Daniel  that  Allen's  con-  F  the  note  of  interrogation  after  love, 

jecture  left  is  the  true  reading,  but  all  reads  is't. 
the  old  editions  have  lost.     With  the 


16  HOMEO   AND   JULIET  [ACTI. 

Ben.   A  right  fair  mark,  fair  coz,  is  soonest  hit. 
Rom.  Well,  in  that  hit  you  miss  :  she  '11  not  be  hit 
With  Cupid's  arrow ;  she  hath  Dian's  wit ; 
And,  in  strong  proof  of  chastity  well  arm'd, 
From    love's    weak     childish     bow     she    lives    un- 
harm'd.  2 1  5 

She  will  not  stay  the  siege  of  loving  terms, 
Nor  bide  the  encounter  of  assailing  eyes, 
Nor  ope  her  lap  to  saint-seducing  gold  : 
O,  she  is  rich  in  beauty ;  only  poor 
That,     when     she     dies,    with     beauty     dies     her 
store.  220 

Ben.   Then    she    hath     sworn     that     she    will    still    live 

chaste  ? 

Rom.   She  hath,  and  in  that  sparing  makes  huge  waste ; 
For  beauty,  starved  with  her  severity, 

212.    Well}  Q,  F;  But  Q  I.          215.  imhanrfd}  Q  I  ;  vnchannd  Q,  F. 
217.   bide}Q,bidY.        218.  ope}  Q,  open  Y.        222.   makes]  Q  4  ;  make  Q,  F. 

211.  mark}  Compare  Lyly,    Gal  la-  "  Let  those  whom  Nature  hath  not 

thea,  v.  iii.  :   "But  beautie  is  a  faire  made  for  store, 

marke  to  hit."  Harsh  featureless  and  rude,  barrenly 

214.  proof}   armour   of  proof,    im-  perish." 

penetrable  armour,  as  in  Coriolatms,  If     Rosaline     dies     wedded,     beauty 

I.  iv.  25.  indeed   dies  ;  but  if  she   dies   single, 

215.  unharnfd}  Collier  (MS.)  has  beauty  dies  and  also  beauty's  store. 
encharmed,    meaning    protected  by  a  Theobald     read,      "with     her     dies 
charm,   as  a  correction  of  Q,    F   vn-  Beauty's    store";    but    it    is    not    re- 
charmd.     Steevens   supposed    that    a  quired.      Compare  also  Sonnets,  xiv.  : 
compliment  to  Queen  Elizabeth  was  "Truth    and    beauty    shall    together 
designed.      Q  I,  from  which  imharm\i  thrive,    If  from   thyself  to  store  thou 
is  taken,  reads  ^Gainst  Cupict  s  child-  wouldst  convert,"   i.e.   if  you    would 
ish  bow.  propagate  children. 

220.   "with  .   .   .   store}   I   think  her         222.   She    .    .    .    waste}      Compare 

store  means  beauty's  store.      Rosaline  Sonnets,  i.,  for  the  same  idea  :    "And, 

is  the  possessor  of  beauty  and  also  of  tender      churl,      makest     waste     in 

beauty's  store,  i.e.  the  reserve  of  beauty  niggarding." 

(in  posterity)  or  the  propagating  power         223.   starved]       Singer       supposes 

of  beauty.     Compare  Sonnets,  xi. ,  and  sterv'd(so  spelled  in  Q,  F)  to  mean, 

especially  the  lines  :  as  it  certainly  may,  perished,  dead. 


sc.i.j  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  17 

Cuts  beauty  off  from  all  posterity. 

She  is  too  fair,  too  wise,  wisely  too  fair,  225 

To  merit  bliss  by  making  me  despair : 

She  hath  forsworn  to  love ;  and  in  that  vow 

Do  I  live  dead,  that  live  to  tell  it  now. 

Ben.  Be  ruled  by  me ;  forget  to  think  of  her. 

Rom.   O,  teach  me  how  I  should  forget  to  think.         230 

Ben.   By  giving  liberty  unto  thine  eyes : 
Examine  other  beauties. 

Rom.  'Tis  the  way 

To  call  hers,  exquisite,  in  question  more. 
These  happy  masks  that  kiss  fair  ladies'  brows, 
Being     black,    put     us     in     mind     they    hide     the 
fair ;  235 

He  that  is  strucken  blind  cannot  forget 
The  precious  treasure  of  his  eyesight  lost : 
Show  me  a  mistress  that  is  passing  fair, 
What  doth  her  beauty  serve  but  as  a  note 
Where     I     may    read    who     pass'd     that     passing 
fair?  240 

Farewell :  thou  canst  not  teach  me  to  forget. 

Ben.   I  '11  pay  that  doctrine,  or  else  die  in  debt. 

[Exeunt. 

235.  put]  Q  5  ;  puts  Q,  F. 

225.  wisely     too     fair]     Johnson  "To  make   her   unparalleled   beauty 

accepts  Hanmer's  reading  too  wisely  more    the    subject    of    thought    and 

fair.  conversation." 

233.    To  call  .   .   .   more]  Exquisite  234.    These  happy   masks]   not    (as 

in   Q,    F  is  in  marks  of  parenthesis,  has  been  suggested)  masks  worn  by 

The  meaning  seems  to  be,  To  call  her  ladies  at  the  theatre,  but,  generally, 

beauty,  which  is  exquisite,  yet  more,  the  masks  (of  our  day), 

being  challenged  and  put  to  the  test.  242.  pay  that  doctrine]  deliver  that 

Malone,  taking  question  to  mean  con-  piece  of  instruction, 
versation  (as  it  often  did),  explains : 

2 


18  HOMEO    AND   JULIET  [ACTI. 

SCENE  II. —  The  Same.     A  Street. 
Enter  CAPULET,  PARIS,  and  Servant. 

Cap.   But  Montague  is  bound  as  well  as  I, 

In  penalty  alike ;  and  'tis  not  hard,  I  think, 
For  men  so  old  as  we  to  keep  the  peace. 

Par.  Of  honourable  reckoning  are  you  both  ; 

And  pity  'tis  you  lived  at  odds  so  long.  5 

But  now,  my  lord,  what  say  you  to  my  suit  ? 

Cap.   But  saying  o'er  what  I  have  said  before : 
My  child  is  yet  a  stranger  in  the  world ; 
She  hath  not  seen  the  change  of  fourteen  years ; 
Let  two  more  summers  wither  in  their  pride          I  o 
Ere  \ve  may  think  her  ripe  to  be  a  bride. 

Par.  Younger  than  she  are  happy  mothers  made. 

Cap.   And  too  soon  marr'd  are  those  so  early  made. 
The  earth  hath  swallow'd  all  my  hopes  but  she, 
She  is  the  hopeful  lady  of  my  earth  :  i  5 

Enter  .  .  .]  Rowe  ;  Enter  Capulet,  Countie  Paris,  and  the  Clowne  Q,  F. 
I.  But}  Q;  omitted  F;  And  Qq  4,  5.  13.  made]  Q,  F;  married  Q  i. 
14.  The  earth]  Qq  4,  5  ;  Earth  Q,  F  ;  Earth  up  Ff  2-4. 

9.  fourteen years\  In  Brooke's  poem  verse.     F  2,  inserting  it/>,  shows  that 

Juliet  is  older  :    "  Scarse  saw  she  yet  the  line  was  considered  defective, 

full    xvi   years";    in    Paynter's  prose  15.    my   earth]   Three  explanations 

tale  she  is  nearly   eighteen.      Shake-  have  been  given — (i)  A  Gallicism,  fille 

speare's    Marina,   in  Pericles,  is  four-  de  terre,  heiress — Steevens.     (2)  my 

teen  ;  his  Miranda  is  fifteen.  body,  as  in  II.  i.  2,  in  Sonnets,  cxlvi. 

13.  made]  The  jingle  between  made  "Poor  soul,  the  centre  of  my  sinful 
and  marr'd  occurs,  as  Dyce  notes,  in  earth  "  ;    in  Beaumont  and  Fletcher, 
n.  iv.  123,  124,  in  Macbe'th,  II.  iii.  36,  The    Maid's   Tragedy,  v.    19,    "This 
and    elsewhere.     The  jingle  of   Q    I  earth  of  mine  doth  tremble  " — Mason 
made   and    married  occurs    in    All's  and    Malone,    with    whom    I    agree. 
Well,   II.    iii.    315:    "A  young  man  (3)  the  hopeful  lady  of  the  world  for 
married  is  a  man  that's  marr'd,"  and  me — Ulrici.       Cartwright  conjectures 
in  other  writers  beside  Shakespeare.  hearth.    The  Elizabethan  earth  mean- 

14.  The  earth]  If  earth  be  read  with  ing/^wf/^'w^suggests  another  possible 
F,   Q,  swallowed  of  F,  Q  is  perhaps  explanation  ;  cf.   Ant.  and  Cleof.  II, 
a  trisyllable,  but  it  hardly  mends  the  ii.  233. 


sc.  ii.]          ROMEO   AND   JULIET  ID 

But  woo  her,  gentle  Paris,  get  her  heart, 

My  will  to  her  consent  is  but  a  part ; 

An  she  agree,  within  her  scope  of  choice 

Lies  my  consent  and  fair  according  voice. 

This  night  I  hold  an  old  accustom'd  feast,  20 

Whereto  I  have  invited  many  a  guest, 

Such  as  I  love  ;  and  you,  among  the  store, 

One  more,  most  welcome,  makes  my  number  more. 

At  my  poor  house  look  to  behold  this  night 

Earth-treading  stars  that  make  dark  heaven  light :    2  5 

Such  comfort  as  do  lusty  young  men  feel 

When  well-apparell'd  April  on  the  heel 

Of  limping  winter  treads,  even  such  delight 

Among  fresh  female  buds  shall  you  this  night 

Inherit  at  my  house;  hear  all,  all  see,  30 

And  like  her  most  whose  merit  most  shall  be : 

Which  on  more  view  of,  many — mine  being  one — 

May  stand  in  number,  though  in  reckoning  none. 

18.  An}  Capell,  And  Q,  F  ;  agree}  F,  agreed  Q  (alone).  29.  female} 
Q  I  ;  fennell  Q,  F.  32.  Which  on}  Qq  4,  5  ;  Which  one  Q,  F  ;  view  of, 
many}  Ed.  ;  view,  of  many,  O,  F  ;  view  of  many,  Qq  I,  4,  5. 

17.  to  her  consent}  My  will  is  a  part  26.  young  men}  Johnson  proposed 
subsidiary  to  her  consent,  which  is  the  yeomen,  and  Daniel,   printing  young- 
chief  thing.  men    from    Q    I,    understands    it    as 

18.  An  she  agree}  Daniel,  inserting  yeomen.       Malone  happily  compares 
a  comma  after  And,  follows  Q,  And,  Sonnets,  xcviii. : 

she  agreed.  "  When  proud-pied   April  dress'd  in 

20.     old    accustomed}    Dyce,    after  all  his  trim 

Walker,  hyphens  these  words.  Hath  put  a  spirit  of  youth  in  every  - 

25.  make  dark  heaven  light}  Stars  thing." 

of  earth   which    shall    cast    up   their  28.  limbing}  Daniel  prints  lumping, 

beams    to  the    dark  heaven  and  illu-  Q  I,  "  as  conveying  a  more  picturesque 

minate  it.     Warburton  read  dark  even  notion  of  dull,  heavy,  boorish  winter." 

(i.e.  evening)  light.      Mason  proposed  30.   Inherit}  possess,  as  in  Tempest, 

heavens  light,  the  earthly  stars  out-  iv.  i.  154. 

shine,    and    so    eclipse,    the    stars    of  32,  33]  I  venture  on  what  I  suppose 

heaven.    Daniel  suggests  mock(  =rival)  to    be  a  new  pointing  of  these  lines, 

dark  heaven's  light.     No  emendation  but  I  do  not  alter  any  word  of  Qq  4, 

is  needed.  5,    inserting   only  a  comma  after  of, 


20  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  [ACT  i. 

Come,  go  with  me. — Go,  sirrah,  trudge  about 
Through  fair  Verona  ;  find  those  persons  out         3  5 
Whose  names  are  written  there,  and  to  them  say, 
My  house  and  welcome  on  their  pleasure  stay. 

\Exeunt  Capulet  and  Paris. 

Serv.  Find  them  out  whose  names  are  written  here  ! 
It  is  written  that  the  shoemaker  should  meddle 
with  his  yard,  and  the  tailor  with  his  last,  the  40 
fisher  with  his  pencil,  and  the  painter  with  his 
nets ;  but  I  am  sent  to  find  those  persons  whose 
names  are  here  writ,  and  can  never  find  what 
names  the  writing  person  hath  here  writ.  I 
must  to  the  learned.  In  good  time.  45 

Enter  BENVOLIO  and  ROMEO. 

Ben.  Tut,  man,  one  fire  burns  out  another's  burning, 

One  pain  is  lessen'd  by  another's  anguish ; 
Turn  giddy,  and  be  holp  by  backward  turning ; 
One  desperate  grief  cures  with  another's  languish  : 

38,  39.   written  here!  If\  Dyce  ;  written.     Here  it  Q,  F.          43.   here  wril~\ 
Q,  writ  Y. 

and   dashes   to    make    the    meaning  misled  into  supposing  an  allusion  here 

clearer.      Which  for  who  and  -whom  is  to    the    old   saying   that    "one  is  no 

common  in  Shakespeare.     Reckoning  number.''       Q    I    has    Such   amongst 

is  used  for  estimation  in  line  4  of  this  view  of  many  mync  bee  ing  one, ;  Capell, 

scene.     The  meaning    I  take  to  be  :  On    -which    more  '<jit.iv  ;    Mason   pro- 

On  more  view  of  whom  (i.e.  the  lady  posed  and  Dyce  read,  Whilst  on  more 

of  most  merit),  many  (other  ladies) —  view  of  many,  ;  Daniel,  Such  amongst, 

and  my  daughter  among  them — may  view  o'er  many,  •  other  suggestions  of 

stand    in    a    count    of  heads,    but    in  less  value  may  be  found  in  Cambridge 

estimation  (reckoning,  with  a  play  on  Shakespeare. 

the    word)    none   can    hold    a    place.  46.   one  /ire]    Rolfe    refers    to    the 

The    same  construction  of    "which"  proverb   "fire    drives    out    fire,''  and 

governed  by  a  following   "view  of"  compares  Julius    Ctcsar,   in.   i.    171, 

occurs  in  Henry  VIII.  IV.  i.  70,  71  :  and    Coriolanus,    iv.    vii.    54.      The 

"which   when   the   people   Had   the  passage    was   probably   suggested   by 

more   view   of,    such   a   noise,"   etc.  lines  in  Brooke's  poem. 
Commentators,    I    think,    have   been 


sc.  ii.]  ROMEO    AND   JULIET  21 

Take  thou  some  new  infection  to  thy  eye,  50 

And  the  rank  poison  of  the  old  will  die. 

Rom.  Your  plantain  leaf  is  excellent  for  that. 

Ben.  For  what,  I  pray  thee  ? 

Rom.  For  your  broken  shin. 

Ben.  Why,  Romeo,  art  thou  mad  ? 

Rom.  Not  mad,  but  bound  more  than  a  madman  is ;    55 
Shut  up  in  prison,  kept  without  my  food, 
Whipp'd    and    tormented,    and  —  Good-den,    good 
fellow. 

Serv.  God  gi'  good-den.      I  pray,  sir,  can  you  read? 

Rom.   Ay,  mine  own  fortune  in  my  misery. 

Scrv.   Perhaps  you  have   learned   it   without  book  :      60 
but,  I  pray,  can  you  read  any  thing  you  see  ? 

Rom.   Ay,  if  I  know  the  letters  and  the  language. 

Serv.  Ye  say  honestly ;  rest  you  merry  ! 

Rom.  Stay,  fellow  ;   I  can  read.  \Rcads. 

Signior  Martino  and  his  wife  and  daughters ;        65 
County  Anselme  and  his  beauteous  sisters  ; 
The  lady  widow  of  Vitruvio  ; 

SO.  thy'}  Q  (alone),  the  F.  57.  Good-den}  Capell ;  Godden  Q,  F. 
58.  God  g?  good-den]  Godgigoden  Q,  F.  65.  daughters]  Q,  daughter  F. 
66.  Anselme]  Q  (facsimile)  Anselme  Q  (Daniel,  Furness).  67.  Vitruvio] 
F  3  ;  Vtruuio  O  i,  Q,  F. 

52.  plantain"}  So  referred  to,  as  a  list  of  invited  guests  was  in  verse  ; 
salve  for  a  broken  shin,  in  Love's  Dyce  (ed.  2)  so  prints  it.  In  line  66 
Labour's  Lost,  in.  i.  76.  Romeo  would  Anselme,  a  trisyllable,  should  perhaps, 
turn  aside  Benvolio's  talk  of  remedies  as  Capell  conjectured,  be  Anselmo. 
for  love  with  a  jest  on  the  popular  (.,)  I  for  line  71  has  My  fa/re  Ncae 
remedy  for  an  ailment  less  hard  to  Rosaline  and  Livia.  Is  it  an  over- 
cure  than  a  broken  heart  ;  let  us  refinement  to  suppose  that  Romeo 
discuss  broken  shins,  not  deeper  falters  and  delays  over  Rosaline's 
wounds.  name,  and  that  the  text  as  printed 

57.  Good-den}  A  corruption  of  above  was  so  designed  ?  Fair  may 

"  good  e'en,'' it  being  now  the  after-  be  a  dissyllable;  but  it  is  not  so  in 

noon.  line  74. 

65-73.   Capell  conjectured  that  the 


22  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  [ACTI. 

Signior  Placentio  and  his  lovely  nieces  ; 

Mercutio  and  liis  brother  Valentine  ; 

Mine  uncle  Capulet,  his  wife  and  daughters  ;          70 

My  fair  niece  Rosaline  ;  Livia  ; 

Signior  Valentio  and  his  cousin  Tybalt ; 

Lucio  and  the  lively  Helena. 

A  fair  assembly ;  whither  should  they  come  ? 

Serv.  Up —  75 

Rom.  Whither  ?  to  supper  ? 

Serv.  To  our  house. 

Rom.  Whose  house  ? 

Serv.   My  master's. 

Rom.   Indeed,  I  should  have  asked  you  that  before.      So 

Serv.  Now  I  '11  tell  you  without  asking.  My  master 
is  the  great  rich  Capulet ;  and  if  you  be  not 
of  the  house  of  Montagues,  I  pray,  come 
and  crush  a  cup  of  wine.  Rest  you  merry  ! 

[Exit. 

Ben.   At  this  same  ancient  feast  of  Capulet's  85 

Sups  the  fair  Rosaline,  whom  thou  so  lovest, 
With  all  the  admired  beauties  of  Verona : 
Go  thither ;  and  with  unattainted  eye 

75-  Up—}  Kcightley,  Up.  Q,  F.  76.  Whither?  to  supper?}  F,  Q  5  ; 
Whither  to  supper?  < ).  84.  Exit]  F,  omitted  O.  86.  lovest}  F  2; 
loves  Q  I,  Q,  F. 

75-77]  I  believe  that  Romeo  eagerly  So   Greene,    Works  (Grosart),  xi.   43, 

interrupts    the    Servant,    who    would  "crush  a  potte  of  ale." 
have  said  "  Up  to  our  house."     It  is         86.   lovest}  The  loves  of  Q,  F  is  not 

afternoon,    and    Romeo    guesses  that  out    of    accord    with    Shakespeare's 

the  invitations  are  for  supper.      Many  usage. 

editors,    following     Warburton     and         88.   •unattainted}  So  1   Henry    VI. 

Theobald,  assign  the  words  to  supper  V.    v.    Si  :     "  My  tender   youth    was 

to  the  Servant,  line  77.  never  yet   attaint   With    any  passion 

84.   crush  .    .   .   wine}  drink,  quaff,  of  inflaming  love." 


SG.II.J  ROMEO    AND   JULIET  23 

Compare  her  face  with  some  that  I  shall  show, 
And  I  will  make  thee  think  thy  swan  a  crow.       90 
Rom.   When  the  devout  religion  of  mine  eye 

Maintains  such  falsehood,  then  turn  tears  to  fires  ! 
And  these,  who  often  drown'd  could  never  die, 

Transparent  heretics,  be  burnt  for  liars  ! 
One  fairer  than  my  love!  the  all-seeing  sun           95 
Ne'er     saw     her      match      since     first      the     world 

begun. 

Ben.  Tut,  you  saw  her  fair,  none  else  being  by, 
Herself  poised  with  herself  in  either  eye ; 
But  in  that  crystal  scales  let  there  be  weigh'd 
Your  lady's  love  against  some  other  maid  100 

That  I  will  show  you  shining  at  this  feast, 
And  she  shall  scant    show  well    that    now    seems 

best. 
Rom.   I  '11  go  along,  no  such  sight  to  be  shown, 

But  to  rejoice  in  splendour  of  mine  own.      {Exeunt. 

92.  fires]  Pope;  /re   Q    I,    Q,   F.  97.    Tut]  F,  Q  ;    Tut    Tut   F  2. 

1 02.  seems'}  Q  i,  Q  ;  shoivs  Qq  3-5,  Ff. 

92.  fires\  White  accepts/Vr,  Q,  F,  of  lady-love,  Dyce  produced  one  from 

and  observes  truly,  "The  difference  'Wilson's  Co/tier's  Frophesie,  1594. 

of  a  final  s  seems  not  to  have  been  Keightley  reads  lady  and  love.  Clarke 

regarded  in  rhyme  in  Shakespeare's  ingeniously  suggests  that  "  your  lady's 

day."  love"  means  the  little  love  Rosaline 

95.  suit]  Perhaps  Massinger's  bears  you  ;  let  this  be  weighed  against 

"shade  Of  barren  sieamores  which  the  charms  of  some  other  maid.  O  i 

the  all-seeing  sun  Could  not  pierce  agrees  with  Q,  F  in  "lady's  lo\v.'' 

through''  (Great  Duke  of  Florence,  See  White's  remark  on  fires,  line  92. 

iv.  ii.)  is  an  echo  from  Romeo  and  Might  we  read  maid's  at  the  end  of 

Juliet.  See  I.  125.  this  line  ? 

99.  that  crystal  scales\  Rovve  read  102.  sccms~\  Perhaps  shows  is  right  ; 
//lose,  and  is  followed  by  many  editors,  but  O  I  supports  O  in  reading  seems  ; 
Dyce:    "Used    here    as    a    singular  shows  might  easily  be  repeated  here 
noun."  by  the   printer;    seems,  in   two  inde- 

100.  laJyslnz'e]  Theobald  read  lady-  pendent    texts,    is    unlikely    to    be    a 
love,  which  Dyce  follows.     Challenged  printer's  error. 

to   produce   an   Elizabethan  example 


24  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  [ACT  i. 


SCENE  III. —  The  Same.     A  Room  in  Capulets 
House. 

Enter  Lady  CAPULET  and  Nurse. 

Lady  Cap.  Nurse,  where 's  my  daughter  ?  call  her  forth 
to  me. 

Nurse.  Now,  by  my  maidenhead  at  twelve  year  old, 

I  bade  her  come. — What,  lamb  !   what,  lady-bird  ! — 
God  forbid  ! — Where  's  this  girl  ? — What,  Juliet ! 

Enter  JULIET. 

Jul.   How  now  !   who  calls  ? 

Nurse.  Your  mother. 

Jul.  Madam,  I  am  here.      5 

\Vhat  is  your  will  ? 
Lady  Cap.  This  is  the  matter. — Nurse,  give  leave  awhile, 

WTe  must  talk  in  secret : — nurse,  come  back  again  ; 

I  have  remember'd  me,  thou  's  hear  our  counsel. 

Thou  know'st  my  daughter  's  of  a  pretty  age.        I  o 
Nurse.  Faith,  I  can  tell  her  age  unto  an  hour. 
Lady  Cap.   She  's  not  fourteen. 
Nurse.  I  '11  lay  fourteen  of  my  teeth, — 

2-4.]  In  Q,  F  prose  ;  as  verse,  Johnson  and  many  later  editors.  5,  6.] 
Capell's  arrangement  ;  three  lines  ending  calls,  mother,  will  Q,  F.  7-10- 1 
as  verse  Capell  ;  prose  Q,  F.  12-15.  I'M  •  •  •  La»imas-tide\  Steevens' 
arrangement. 

4.    God  forbid]     Staunton    fancied  Dyce    is    probably  right   in   rejecting 

that  having  used  lady-bird  as  a  term  the     notion;     he     explains:      "God 

of  endearment,  the  Nurse  recollected  forbid  that  any  accident  should  keep 

that  it  was  a  cant  term  for  a  woman  her  away." 

of    loose    life.        A    quotation    from  9.   thou  * s\  Pope  and  other  editors 

Fletcher's  Poems,  given  in  Ilalliwell's  substitute  thou  shall.     The  abbrevia- 

Dict.   of  Archaic  and  Pror.   Wonts,  lion  'se  for  shall  occurs  again  in  Lear, 

illustrates  the  evil  sense  of  the  word.  iv.  vi.  246. 


SC.IH.]         ROMEO   AND   JULIET  25 

And  yet,  to  my  teen  be  it  spoken,  I  have  but  four,— 
She  is  not  fourteen.      How  long  is  it  now 
To  Lammas-tide? 

Lady  Cap.  A  fortnight  and  odd  days.     I  5 

Nurse.   Even  or  odd,  of  all  days  in  the  year, 

Come  Lammas-eve  at  night  shall  she  be  fourteen. 
Susan  and  she — God  rest  all  Christian  souls  ! — 
Were  of  an  age :  well,  Susan  is  with  God  ; 
She  was  too  good  for  me: — but,  as  I  said,  20 

On  Lammas-eve  at  night  shall  she  be  fourteen  ; 
That  shall  she,  marry ;   I  remember  it  well. 
'Tis  since  the  earthquake  now  eleven  years  ; 
And  she  was  wean'd — I  never  shall  forget  it — 
Of  all  the  days  of  the  year,  upon  that  day  :  2  5 

For  I  had  then  laid  wormwood  to  my  dug, 
Sitting  in  the  sun  under  the  dove-house  wall ; 
My  lord  and  you  were  then  at  Mantua : — 
Nay,  I  do  bear  a  brain  : — but,  as  I  said, 

14.  She  is]  Steevens,   slices   Q,  slice's   V.          16-48    Even  .   .  .   "Ay"] 
Capell ;  prose  Q,  F. 

13.   teen}  sorrow,  as  in   Tempest,  I.  account    of    the    Italian    earthquakes 

ii.  64.      Ff  2-4  here  read  teeth,  which  of    1570    was     printed     in     London 

spoils  the  play  on  fourteen.  (Staunton).      "In   the   whole    speech 

15.  Lammas-tide']     The      first     of  of  the  Nurse  there  are  such  discrep- 
August,   loaf-mass  or  wheat-harvest,  ancies  as  render  it  impossible  to  arrive 
Lady  Capulet's  reply  fixes  the  dram-  at  any  definite  conclusion  "  (Collier). 
atic  season  of  the  year.  See  Introduction. 

23.   the  earthquake}  Tyrvvhitt   con-  26.   wonttiuood]     Halliwell     quotes 

jectured  a  reference  here  to  the  earth-  from  Cawdray's   Treasnrie  (1600)  an 

quake  felt  in  England,  April  6,  1580,  allusion  to  mothers  putting  "  worme- 

and  he  inferred  that  the  play,  or  this  wood  or  mustard''   on  the   breast  at 

part    of    it,    was    written    in     1591.  weaning  time. 

Malone  pointed  out  that  if  we  suppose  29.   bear  a  brain']  have  a  headpiece, 

that  Juliet  was  weaned  at  a  year  old,  have    sound    memory.     The    earliest 

she  would  be  only  twelve  ;    but    she  example  in  New  Eng.  Diet,   is  from 

is    just     fourteen.       An    earthquake  Skelton's     Magnificence,     1526,     the 

happened   at  Verona   1348  (Knight),  latest  from  Scott's  Marmion. 
and  at   Verona    1570   (Hunter);    an 


26  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  [ACTI. 

When  it  did  taste  the  wormwood  on  the  nipple    30 

Of  my  dug,  and  felt  it  bitter,  pretty  fool, 

To  see  it  tetchy  and  fall  out  with  the  dug ! 

"  Shake,"  quoth  the  dove-house :  'twas  no  need,  I 

trow, 

To  bid  me  trudge. 

And  since  that  time  it  is  eleven  years  ;  3  5 

For  then  she  could  stand  high-lone ;  nay,  by  the 

rood, 

She  could  have  run  and  waddled  all  about ; 
For  even  the  day  before,  she  broke  her  brow : 
And  then  my  husband — God  be  with  his  soul  ! 
A'  was  a  merry  man — took  up  the  child  :  40 

"  Yea,"  quoth  he,  "  dost  thou  fall  upon  thy  face  ? 
Thou  wilt  fall  backward  wrhen  thou  hast  more  wit ; 
Wilt  thou  not,  Jule  ?  "  and,  by  my  holidame, 
The  pretty  wretch  left  crying,  and  said  "  Ay." 
To  see  now  how  a  jest  shall  come  about !  45 

I  warrant,  an  I  should  live  a  thousand  years, 

36.  high-lone]  Q  i,  hylone  Q,  a  lone  Q  3,  alone  The  rest.  43.  holidame] 
Dyce  (ed.  i),  holy  dam  Q,  holy-dam  F.  46.  an"]  Pope,  and  Q,  Y  ;  should] 
Q  I,  Q,  shall  ¥. 

33.   quoth"}    Daniel     suggested     as  early  examples  are  of  infants,  which 

possible  go'th  or  goeth  ;  he  withdraws  leads  me  to  conjecture  that  it  was  a 

the      suggestion.          He      compares  favourite    nursery    word,    as     nurses 

"Bounce    quoth   the   guns,''    Peele,  nowadays  encourage  a  child  to  stand 

Old  Wives'  7'ale  (Uyce's  Greene  and  loney-proudy.       It    occurs,    however, 

Peele,  p.   454) ;   also   in    Heywood's  with    no    reference     to    children    in 

Fair  Maid  of  the    West   (Pearson's  CalfhilTs  Answers  to  the   Treatise  of 

reprint,  ii.   315):    "  Rouse  quoth  the  the  Crosse(  1565),  p.  274,  Parker  Soc., 

ship,''  Chettle,  Hoffman,  I.  ii.  and    in     Rowley's    A    Shoemaker    a 

36.   high-lone}    New   Eng.    Diet.:  Gentleman  (1638). 

"An  alteration  of  alone,  of  obscure  43.   holidame}  A   different   form  of 

origin.        High     probably     expresses  halidoin    (which    Dyce    ed.    2    reads) 

degree      or      intensity";      examples  induced    by    the    popular    error    that 

follow  from   Marston  and  Middleton.  halidoin  (sanctity)  was  —  Holy  Dame, 

A  latcexample(i76o),G.  Washington,  "our  Lady." 
S.),  is  used  of  mares.     Some 


sc.  in.]          ROMEO   AND   JULIET  27 

I    never  should   forget  it:   "Wilt   thou   not,  Jule?" 
quoth  he  ; 

And,  pretty  fool,  it  stinted  and  said  "  Ay." 
Lady  Cap.   Enough  of  this  ;    I  pray  thec,  hold  thy  peace. 
Nurse.  Yes,  madam  :  yet  I  cannot  choose  but  laugh,    50 

To  think  it  should  leave  crying,  and  say  "  Ay  "  : 

And  yet,  I  warrant,  it  had  upon  it  brow 

A  bump  as  big  as  a  young  cockerel's  stone; 

A  perilous  knock;  and  it  cried  bitterly: 

"  Yea,"    quoth     my    husband,     "  fall'st     upon     thy 
face  ?  55 

Thou  wilt  fall  backward  when  thou  comest  to  age ; 

Wilt  thou  not,  Jule  ?  "  it  stinted  and  said  "  Ay." 
Jul.   And  stint  thou  too,  I  pray  thee,  nurse,  say  I. 
Nurse.    Peace,    I    have    done.      God    mark    thee    to    his 
grace ! 

Thou     \vast      the     prettiest      babe      that     e'er     I 
nursed :  60 

An  I  might  live  to  see  thee  married  once, 

I  have  my  wish. 
Lady  Cap.   Marry,  that  "  many  "  is  the  very  theme 

I  come  to  talk  of.      Tell  me,  daughter  Juliet, 

How  stands  your  disposition  to  be  married?          65 

47.  /tt/c]  (,),  Inlet  Y.         50-57.    Yes  .   .   .  "  Ay '']  verse  Capell,  prose  F. 
59-62.  Peace  .   .   .  wish]  verse  Pope  ;  prose  (,),  F.          6l.  An}  I'ope  ;  And  (J, 
F.         65.  disposition]  F,  dispositions  (.). 

48.  stinted]       ceased       to      weep,      many  editors  to  par  Ions.      But  need 
Steevens  quotes  North,  Plutarch  (of    \ve  be  more  Flizabethan  than  Fliza- 
Antony's  wound),  "the  blood  stinted    bethan  printers? 

a  little." 

52.  //]  its  ;  it  is  a  form  of  the  word 
more  common  in  the  Folio  than  //  's. 
Ff  3,  4  here  alter  the  word  to  its, 
and  so  many  editors. 

54.  perilous]  altered  by  Capell  and     marriage.'' 


57.    "  .<•/ V    ]  pronounced,  and  com- 


monly   spelt   in   Shakespeare  s    time, 


1  ;  to  which  Juliet's  say  1  is  a  retort. 


6j.   Marry,  that    "  marry    ]   I'ope 


28  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACTI. 

Jul.   It  is  an  honour  that  I  dream  not  of. 

Nurse.  An  honour !  were  not  I  thine  only  nurse, 

I  would  say  thou  hadst  suck'd  wisdom  from  thy 
teat. 

Lady  Cap.  Well,  think  of  marriage  now  ;  younger  than 

you, 

Here  in  Verona,  ladies  of  esteem,  7° 

Are  made  already  mothers.      By  my  count, 
I  was  your  mother  much  upon  these  years 
That  you  are  now  a  maid.     Thus  then  in  brief; 
The  valiant  Paris  seeks  you  for  his  love. 

Nurse.  A  man,  young  lady!   lady,  such  a  man  75 

As  all  the  world — why,  he  's  a  man  of  wax. 

Lady  Cap.  Verona's  summer  hath  not  such  a  flower. 

Nurse.  Nay,  he  's  a  flower ;  in  faith,  a  very  flower. 

Lady  Cap.  What  say  you  ?  can  you  love  the  gentleman  ? 

66,  67.  honour}  Q  I  ;  houre  Q,  F.  67,  68.]  verse  Pope;  prose  Q,  F. 
68.  wisdom}  Q,  F;  thy  wisdome  Qq  4,  5.  71.  mothers.  By}  F,  mothers 
by  Q-  75,  76.]  verse  Pope;  prose  Q,  F.  76.  -world — ]  F  4;  world.  Q,  F. 

68.  /  would}  many  editors  follow  It   could  not  better  be   propor- 

Pope  in  the  contraction  I'd.  tioned." 

72.  these  years}  Juliet  being  four-  Field,  in  A  Woman  is  a  Weathercock, 

teen,  Lady  Capulet  is  "much  upon"  has,  "By  Jove,  it  is  a  little  man  of 

twenty-eight.     Staunton  observes  that  wax."     Ingleby's  notion  that  it  means 

her  husband,  old  Capulet,  having  done  a  man  of  full  growth  does  not  deserve 

masking  some  thirty  years  (l.  v.  37),  consideration,    and    finds    no  support 

must  be  at  least  threescore.     Knight  from  2  Henry  IV.   1.   ii.    180,  where 

changes  your  mother  to  a  motlier.  Falstaff  plays  on  wax  of  a  candle  and 

76.   a  man  of  wax}  a  man  for  beauty  wax  to  grow  in  size, 
like  a  model  in  wax  ;  see  in.  iii.  126.          79.    What  say  you?}  This  bravura 

Steevens  quotes  from  Wily  Beguiled :  speech    of  ingenious  conceits  is  sup- 

"  A  man  as  one  should  picture  him  in  posed  by  Ulrici  to  have  a  deep  dramatic 

wax";  White,  from  Ei<phucs  and  his  design — to    exhibit    Lady  Capulet  as 

England:  "So  exquisite  that  for  shape  an  artificial   woman   of  the  world  in 

he  must  be  framed  in  wax.:>     Dyce,  her    euphuistic    speech.      It  probably 

from  Fair  Em  :  means  no  more  than  that  the  writer 

"  A  body,  were  it  framed  of  wax  was  immature  and  liked  such  conceits, 

By  all  the  cunning  artists  of  the  as   seen   in  Lucrece,  quoted    line   86, 

world,  note. 


SC.  III.] 


ROMEO   AND   JULIET 


29 


This  night  you  shall  behold  him  at  our  feast :       80 

Read  o'er  the  volume  of  young  Paris'  face, 

And  find  delight  writ  there  with  beauty's  pen  ; 

Examine  every  married  lineament, 

And  see  how  one  another  lends  content ; 

And  what  obscured  in  this  fair  volume  lies  85 

Find  written  in  the  margent  of  his  eyes. 

This  precious  book  of  love,  this  unbound  lover, 

To  beautify  him,  only  lacks  a  cover : 

The  fish  lives  in  the  sea ;  and  'tis  much  pride 

For  fair  without  the  fair  within  to  hide :  90 

That  book  in  many's  eyes  doth  share  the  glory, 


83.  married]  O  (alone),  sevcrall  F. 
Q  (alone). 

83.  married}  The  word  as  used  here 
for  mutually  dependent  is  illustrated 
by  the  "well-tuned  sounds  I5y  unions 
married  "  of  Sonnets,  viii. ;  but  several 
has  the  authority  of  all  texts  except  Q. 

84.  content}  Perhaps  with  a  play  (in 
contents   of  a    volume,    though    else- 
where in  Shakespeare  only  the  plural 
contents  is  used  for  what  is  contained. 

85.  obscured}  Allen  suggests  obscure. 

86.  viargenf}  Obscurities  were  often 
explained  in  old  books  in  the  margin. 
Compare  Hamlet,  \.  ii.  162.     Malone 
quotes  a  close  parallel  :   Lucrece,  99- 
102  : 

"  But  she,    that   never  coped  with 

stranger  eyes, 
Could  pick  no  meaning  from  their 

parling  looks, 

Nor  read  the  subtle-shining  sec- 
recies 
Writ  in   the    glassy   margents  of 

such  books." 

So  Dekker,  Honest  Whore  (Pearson's 
Pekker,  ii.  p.  136)  :  "I  read  Strange 
comments  in  those  margines  of  your 
lookes." 

87.  unbound}  unattached  (ofa lover) ; 
without  binding  (ofa  book). 


90.  fair  •within']  F,  faire,  within 


88.  cover]   Mason    suggests  a  play 
onfenime  couverte,  a  married  woman. 
That  which  binds  a  lover  is  a  wife, 
and  as  the  lover  here  is  an  unbound 
book,  a  wife  corresponds  to  the  binding 
or  cover  of  the  book.     The  present 
passage  is   the   earliest  cited  in  New 
Eng.  Diet,  for  cover  of  a  book. 

89.  The  fish]  Farmer  supposed  there 
was  an  allusion  here  to  fish-skin  used 
for  binding  books,  a  far-fetched  notion. 
Lady  Capulet,  I  think,  interrupts  her 
metaphor  of  a  book  to  say  Lovers  are 
at  large,  like  fishes  in  the  sea,  but  ready 
to  be  hooked.     For  the  metaphor  of 
lover  as  a  fish,  see  Chorus  preceding 
Act    n.    8,    Much    Ado,    II.    iii.    114, 
and    in.    i.    26-29,    Ant.    and   Cleop. 
n.     v.     10-15.       This     parenthetical 
metaphor  occurs  after  the  description 
of  Paris  ;  then  the  main  metaphor  pro- 
ceeds,   in  a  second   part,   with  Juliet 
(the  book-cover)  for  its  theme.    Mason 
proposes   shell    for    sea,    the    purport 
of    what    follows    being,    he    thinks, 
to  show   the  advantage   of  having   a 
handsome  person  to  cover  a  virtuous 
mind. 


30  HOMEO   AND   JULIET  [ACTI. 

That  in  gold  clasps  locks  in  the  golden  story : 
So  shall  you  share  all  that  he  doth  possess, 
By  having  him  making  yourself  no  less. 
Nurse.  No  less!   nay,  bigger:  women  grow  by  men.     95 
Lady    Cap.    Speak    briefly,    can    you    like    of    Paris' 

love  ? 

JuL   I  '11  look  to  like,  if  looking  liking  move  ; 
But  no  more  deep  will  I  endart  mine  eye 
Than  your  consent  gives  strength  to  make  it  fly. 

Enter  a  Servant. 

Serv.   Madam,  the  guests  are  come,  supper  served    100 
up,  you  called,  my  young  lady  asked  for,  the 
nurse  cursed  in  the  pantry,  and  every  thing  in 
extremity.      I  must  hence  to  wait  ;   I  beseech 
you,  follow  straight. 

Lady  Cap.  We    follow    thee.     \Exit   ServJ\ — Juliet,    105 
the  County  stays. 

Nurse.   Go,  girl,  seek  happy  nights  to  happy  days. 

[Exeunt. 

95.  bigger:  women]  F,  bigger  women  Q.         99.  it]  omitted  Q,   F,  Q  3  ; 
present  in  the  rest. 

92.  clasps]  Paris's  bride  is  still  the  to  lovers  handfasted  by  "tiak  golden 

binding;    there  is  a   play  on   clasps;  claspe  of  the  spirite." 

the  golden  clasps  (embraces)  of  a  bride  98.   endart]  Pope,  from  Q   I,  reads 

shutting  in  the  golden  story  of  love,  ingage,  which  meant  entangle. 

In   Othello,   I.   i.    127,  we  have   "the  106.    County'}    Count,    probably  an 

gross  clasps   of  a    lascivious    Moor."  adoption  of  Italian  conte  with  retention 

T.    Bright,    Treatise    of  Melancholy,  of  the  final  syllable.      So  All's  Well, 

1586,  p.  36,  compares  soul  and  body  ill.  vii.  22,  "a  ring  the  county  wears.'' 


sc.  iv.]         HOMEO   AND   JULIET  31 


SCENE  IV. —  The  Same.     A  Street. 

Enter  ROMEO,  MERCUTIO,  BENVOLIO,  with  five  or  six 
other  Maskers,  Torch-bearers,  and  Others. 

Rom.  What,  shall  this  speech  be  spoke  for  our  excuse, 
Or  shall  we  on  without  apology  ? 

Ben.   The  date  is  out  of  such  prolixity  : 

\Ve  '11  have  no  Cupid  hoodwink'd  with  a  scarf, 

Bearing  a  Tartar's  painted  bow  of  lath,  5 

Scaring  the  ladies  like  a  crow-keeper; 

Nor  no  without-book  prologue,  faintly  spoke 

After  the  prompter,  for  our  entrance : 

But,  let  them  measure  us  by  what  they  will, 

We  '11  measure  them  a  measure,  and  be  gone.         I  o 

7,  8.  Nor  .   .  .  entrance]  Q  i  ;  omitted  Q,  F. 

I.   this  speech]  Furness  suggests  the  tinguish    it    from    the    English    bow, 

speech.     Capell  conjectures  that  Ben-  whose   shape   is    the    segment    of   a 

volio  and  Mercutio  are  the  speakers,  circle." 

assigning  conjectural!}-   I,  2  to  Ben.,  6.   crow-keeper]  a  boy  employed  to 

3-10  to  Mer.,  and  13  to  Ben.  scare  crows;   also  a  scare-crow.     So 

3.  prolixity]  Benvolio  says  that  the  Lear,    iv.     vi.     88:     "That    fellow 
apology   of    masquerade rs    for    their  handles  his  bow  like  a  crow-keeper.'' 
entrance  is  out  of  date.     Moth's  apolo-  Steevcns  quotes  Drayton,  Idea,  48  : 
getic    or    explanatory  speech,    intro-  "  And  when  corn  's  sown,  or  grown 
ducing  the  maskers  in  Lore's  Labour  s  into  the  ear, 

Lost,  v.  ii.  158,  is  an  example.     See  Practise  thy  quiver  like  a  erow- 

also   Cupid's  speech   in    Titnon,  I.  ii.  keeper.'" 

128,  and  the  Chamberlain's  speech  in  7,  S.]  White  conjectures  that  these 

Henry  VIII.  \.  iv.  65.     "In  Histrio-  lines,  found  only  in  Q  I,  were  omitted 

mastix     a     man    wonders    that    the  on  account  of  their  disparagement  of 

maskers   come    in    so   blunt,    without  prologue  speakers  on  the  stage. 

device"  (Steevens).  8.   entrance'}  a   trisyllable    here,   as 

4.  hoodwink'd   .    .    .    scarf]       So  in    Macbeth,    I.    v.    40.      Hanmer    in 
"hood-winked  in  this  scarf,"  Jonson,  place  of  for  read  'fore. 

Silent  Woman,  iv.  ii.  10.   a  measure]  a  grave  and  dignified 

5.  bow]    Douce:     "The    Tartarian  dance.      Compare   Much   Ado,    n.    i. 
bows  .    .   .   resembled    in   their    form  So:    "  the  wedding  mannerly-modest, 
the  old   Roman  or  Cupid's  bow,  such  as    a  measure  full    of   state   and    an- 
as we  see  on  medals  and  bas-reliefs,  cientry."       The    play    on    the    word 
Shakespeare  uses  the  epithet  to  dis-  occurs  in  Richard  II.  in.  iv.  7. 


32  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  [ACTI. 

Rom,  Give  me  a  torch :   I  am  not  for  this  ambling ; 

Being  but  heavy,  I  will  bear  the  light. 
Mer.  Nay,  gentle  Romeo,  we  must  have  you  dance. 
Rom.  Not  I,  believe  me :  you  have  dancing  shoes 

With  nimble  soles  ;   I  have  a  soul  of  lead  i  5 

So  stakes  me  to  the  ground  I  cannot  move. 
Mer.  You  are  a  lover ;  borrow  Cupid's  wings, 

And  soar  with  them  above  a  common  bound. 
Rom.   I  am  too  sore  enpierced  with  his  shaft 

To  soar  with  his  light  feathers;  and  so  bound,      20 

I  cannot  bound  a  pitch  above  dull  woe : 

Under  love's  heavy  burden  do  I  sink. 
Mer.  And,  to  sink  in  it,  should  you  burden  love ; 

Too  great  oppression  for  a  tender  thing. 
Rom.   Is  love  a  tender  thing?  it  is  too  rough,  25 

Too  rude,  too  boisterous ;  and  it  pricks  like  thorn. 
Mer.   If  love  be  rough  with  you,  be  rough  with  love ; 

Prick  love  for  pricking,  and  you  beat  love  down. 

Give  me  a  case  to  put  my  visage  in  : 

20.  so  bound,}  Q,  to  bound :  Y.        23.  Mer.]  Qq  4,  5  ;  Horatio  Q  ;  Hora.  F. 

II.  torch]  Masquers  and  masquer-  Shakespeare  by  quoting  Milton,  Par. 
aders    were     accompanied    by    their  Lost,  iv.  181  :    "At  one  slight  bound 
torch-bearers.      Westward  Hoe  (Pear-  high  over-leap'd  all  bound." 
son's   Dekker,    ii.    p.    292):    "He   is  23.   burden  love]  Compare  II.  v.  79, 
just   like  a  torch-bearer  to  maskers,  and  line  94  of  the  present  scene, 
he  wears  good  cloathes,  and  is  rankt  29.  visage  in :]  Theobald  read  in  ? 
in     good     company,     but     he     doth  and  added  the  stage  direction  "Put- 
nothing."  ting  offhis  mask."  Johnson,  also  read- 

15.   soul\  The  play  on  the  word  was  ing  in  ?,  added  "  Putting  on  his  mask. " 

irresistible.      Compare  Julius  dcsar,  Capell,  rightly,   I  think,  reading  in., 

I.  i.  15.  added  "taking  one  from  an  Alt.,  "and, 

19.  enpierced}  A  variation  in  spell-  rightly,    after   visor!    line   30,    added 

ing   of   empierced,    or    impierccd,    to  "throwing    it   away."     Mercutio,   an 

which  the  word   was  altered  in  the  invited  guest,  goes,  I  think,  unmasked, 

later  Ff.     New  Eng.  Diet,  gives  no  Perhaps,  as  Professor  Littledale  sug- 

example  of  enpierced  except  that  of  gests,  we  should  read  "visage  in!" 

the  text.  —  Mercutio    at    once    rejecting    the 

21.  bound}  Steevens  apologises  for  mask. 


SC.  IV 


ROMEO   AND   JULIET 


A  visor  for  a  visor!   what  care  I  30 

What  curious  eye  doth  quote  deformities  ? 

Here  are  the  beetle-brows  shall  blush  for  me. 
Ben.  Come,  knock  and  enter ;  and  no  sooner  in 

But  every  man  betake  him  to  his  legs. 
Row.   A  torch  for  me:   let  wantons,  light  of  heart,         35 

Tickle  the  senseless  rushes  with  their  heels  ; 

For  I  am  proverb'd  with  a  grandsire  phrase ; 

I  '11  be  a  candle-holder,  and  look  on. 

The  game  was  ne'er  so  fair,  and  I  am  done. 
Mcr.   Tut,     dun 's     the     mouse,     the      constable's     own 
word :  40 

39.  done]  O  I,  F  ;  ditm  Q  ;  dun  Qq  3-5.         40.  own]  Q,  F  ;  old  Q  I. 


30.  A  visor  for  a  visor!]  My  face, 
fantastic  as  a  mask,   needs  no   visor. 
Compare  Rosaline  to  Herowne,  J.ove  s 
Labour* s  Lost,  v.ii.  387:  "That  vizard; 
that   superfluous   case   That    hid    the 
worse  and  show'd  the  better  face." 

31.  quote]  observe,  as  in  Hamlet,  II. 
i.  112. 

32.  beetle-bro"vs\  overhanging  brows; 
apparently  not  eye-brows,  for  eye-brows 
could    not    blush.       New  Eng.  Diet. 
says    that    brows   in    Middle   English 
always  means  eye-brows ;  beetle-browed 
is  as  old  as  Langland,  Piers  Plough- 
man, 1362.     The  origin  favoured  by 
New    £ng.     Diet,    is    a    comparison 
with    the    tufted   antennaj    of  certain 
kinds  of  beetles.     Shakespeare  seems 
to  have  invented  the  verb  beetle  used 
in  Hamlet,  I.  iv.  71  :    "The  cliff  that 
beetles  o'er  his  base,"  that  is,   a  cliff 
like  an  overhanging  forehead.      Cot- 
grave,  however  (1611),  has   "Beetle- 
browed,  soureilleux, ''  and  he  explains 
sourdlleujc   as     ' '  having    very   great 
eye -brows." 

35,  36.]  Steevens  notes  Middleton's 
echo  of  these  lines  in  Blurt  Master- 
Constable,  1602  : 


" — bid  him,  whose  heart  no  sorrow 

feels, 
Tickle  the  rushes  with  his  wanton 

heels, 
I  have  too  much  lead  at  mine.'' 

36.  rushes]  Steevens  notes  that  not 
only  were  rooms  strewn  with  rushes, 
but    the    stage    was    also    so    strewn. 
1  )ekker's  Gu/'s  Hornbook,  1609:  "On 
the  very  rushes  when  the  comedy  is 
to  daunce." 

37.  grandsire  phrase]  Ray  gives  a 
proverb,  "A good  candle-holder'pYQVzs 
a  good  gamester."     Ritson  (see  line 
39)    refers    to    the    proverbial    saying 
which  advises  to  give  over  when  the 
game  is  at  the  fairest.     /  am  done  in 
line  39  seems  to  mean  I  give  over  the 
game. 

40.  (///;/  's  the  mouse']  This  phrase 
occurs  in  several  Elizabethan  dramas, 
sometimes  with  quibbles  on  done. 
M  alone  took  it  to  mean  Pcaee  ;  be  still ! 
and  hence  he  supposed  it  is  the  con- 
stable's word.  He  cites  Patten: 
Crissel  (i6o3\  "don  is  the  mouse,  lie 
still. "  Mascal  in  Government  of  Cattle. 
(1620)  has  "  mouse  -  dun  coloured 


ROMEO    AND   JULIET 


[ACT  i. 


If  thou  art  Dun,  we'll  draw  thee  from  the  mire, 
Or,  save  your  reverence,  love,  wherein  thou  stick'st 
Up  to  the  ears.      Come,  we  burn  daylight,  ho  ! 

ROJII.   Nay,  that 's  not  so. 

Mer.  I  mean,  sir,  in  delay 

We    waste    our     lights     in     vain,    light    lights    by 
day.  45 

Take  our  good  meaning,  for  our  judgment  sits 
Five  times  in  that  ere  once  in  our  five  wits. 

Rom.   And  we  mean  well  in  going  to  this  mask  ; 
But  'tis  no  wit  to  go. 

Mer.  Why,  may  one  ask  ? 

41.  mire]  O,  i/iire.  F.  42.  Or  .  .  .  love]  F  4,  Or  save  yon  reverence 
love  Qq,  Or  save  your  reverence  love  Ff  1-3,  Of  this  surreverence  love  Q  I. 
44.  sir,  in  delay}  sir  in  delay  Q  ;  sir  in  delay,  Qq  4,  5  ;  sir  I  delay,  F.  45. 
IVe  .  .  .  day}  Nicholson,  IVe  burne  our  lights  by  night,  like  lampes  by  day 
Q  I,  IVe  waste  our  lights  in  vaine,  lights  lights  by  day  Qq,  and  (with  commas) 
lights,  lig/ifs,  Ff.  47.  Jive]  Malone  (Wilbraham  conj.);  fine  Q,  F. 


41.  Dun}  Here  Dun  is  a  dun  horse. 
Dun    is   in   the    mire,    spoken  of   by 
Chaucer,  Canterbury  Tales,  Manciple  s 
Prologue,  and  still  played  by  William 
Giffbrd  when  a  boy,  is  an  old  Christ- 
mas game,  in  which  a  heavy  log  (the 
horse  Dun)  is  brought  into  the  room, 
is  supposed  to  stick  in  the  mire,  and  is 
extricated  by  the  players.      References 
are  not  infrequent  in  Elizabethan  plays. 

42.  Or,  save  your  reverence,   love] 
Many  editors    prefer,   from  Q   i,    Of 
this    sir-reverence    love,    where    sir- 
revcrcme    is    used,    as    indicated    in 
Comedy  of  Errors,  III.  ii.    93,   in  the 
same    apologetic    way    as    save  your 
reverence.      I  see  no  good  reason  for 
departing  from  F. 

43.  burn  daylight}  burn  candles  by 
day,  also  waste  or  consume  the  day- 
light.     Compare  j\lcrry   IVives,  II.  i. 
S4-       See    The   Spanish    Tragedy   in 
Hazlitt's  Dodsley's   Old  Plays,   v.   p. 
1 15  (and  note). 

45.    II 'e   .    .    .    dar}    Thi^    reading. 


proposed  by  Nicholson,  is  printed  by 
Daniel  ;  it  only  rejects  one  letter,  s, 
from  Q,  F.  Johnson  reads  like  lights 
by  day.  Capell's  reading,  IVe  waste 
our  lights  in  vain,  like  lamps  by  day, 
is  commonly  accepted,  but  it  seems 
undesirable  to  make  up  a  new  line 
from  halves  of  O,  F  and  Q  I. 

46.  sits}  Rowe  and  others  readmits  ; 
Collier  (MS.) ///A. 

47.  five  wits}  In  Sonnets,   cxli.   9, 
Shakespeare  speaks  of  the  five  wits  as 
different  from  the   live    senses  ;    it  is 
certain,   however,    that  five  wits   was 
used    for    five    sense.-.       In    Stephen 
Hawes'  poem  Graunde  Amour  and  La 
Belle    PuceUc,    xxiv.    (ed.    1554),    the 
five  wits    are  common  wit,   imagina- 
tion,  fantasy,  estimation  [judgment], 
and   memory  (Dvcc).      Malone  cites, 
from  the  <>ld  copies  of  Shakespeare's 
plays,  other  examples  of  the  erratum 

fine  for  five,  and  '.'ice  versa.  Q  i  has 
Three  limes  a  day,  ere  once  in  her 
rii'ht  whs. 


sc.  iv.]         ROMEO   AND   JULIET 


35 


Rom.   I  dreamt  a  dream  to-night. 

Mer.  And  so  did  I.          50 

Rom.  Well,  what  was  yours  ? 

Mcr.  That  dreamers  often  lie. 

Rom.   In    bed     asleep,    while     they     do     dream     things 
true. 

Mer.  O,  then  I  see  Queen  Mab  hath  been  with  you. 
She  is  the  fairies'  midwife,  and  she  comes 
In  shape  no  bigger  than  an  agate-stone  55 

On  the  forefinger  of  an  alderman, 
Drawn  with  a  team  of  little  atomies 
Athwart  men's  noses  as  they  lie  asleep  : 

54-91.  She  .  .   .  bodes;]  verse  Q  I,  Pope;    prose  Q,    F.         55.  an]    Q, 
omitted  F,  in  Daniel  conjee.         58.  Athwart'}  Q  I  ;  o~cer  Q,  F. 


50.  to-night]  last  night,  as  fre- 
quently in  Shakespeare.  See 
Schmidt's  Lexicon. 

53.  0,  .  .  .  you}  After  this  line 
Q  I  has  "  Ben.  Queene  Mab  whats 
she  ?  "  a  speech  probably  meant  as  a 
pretext  for  Mercutio's  long  descrip- 
tion ;  but  Q  I  continues  to  Benvolio 
the  speech  of  Mercutio. 

53.  Queen  Mab"}  Thorn  ( '  'Three  Note- 
lets  on  Sh.")  states  that  no  earlier  men- 
tion of  Mab  than  the  above  is  known  ; 
that  no  doubt  Shakespeare  got  the  name 
from  folk-lore  of  his  own  time  ;  that 
Mab  in  Welsh  means  an  infant  ;  and 
that  Beaufort,  in  his  Ancient  Topo- 
graphy of  Ireland,  mentions  Mabh 
as  the  chief  of  the  Irish  fairies. 
Drayton,  with  Shakespeare's  descrip- 
tion before  him,  writes,  in  his 
happiest  manner,  of  Queen  Mab  in 
Nymphidia  the  Court  of  Fayric. 
Attempts  have  been  made  to  identify 
Queen  Mab  with  Dame  Abunde  or 
Habunde  ;  and  again  with  the  Irish 
Queen  Maeve.  Sir  H.  Ellis  says  that 
in  Warwickshire  "Mab-led"  (pro- 
nounced Mob-led)  signifies  led  astray 


by  a  Will-o'-the- Wisp  (Brand,  Popular 
Antiquities,  iii.  p.  218,  ed.  1841). 

54.  fairies'     midwife}     Warburton 
conjectured      and       Theobald       read 
Fancy's    midwife.       Warton    conjec- 
tured fairy  midwife.       Steevens    ex- 
plains :  the  person  among  the  fairies 
who  delivers  the  fancies  of  dreamers, 
— the  "  children  of  an  idle  brain  '"  (line 
97).     T.   Warton  suggests  that   Mab 
is  a  midwife  because  she  steals  infants 
(leaving  changelings)  for  the  fairies. 

55.  shape"}  Nicholson  suggests  slate, 
meaning  dignity,  pomp.     See  line  70. 

55.  agate-stone}  That  is,  the  diminu- 
tive figures  cut  in  agate  and  set  in 
rings.  So  2  Henry  IV.  \.  ii.  19. 
(Falstaff  of  his  little  Page)  :  "  I  was 
never  manned  \\ith  an  agate  til!  now.'' 
Glapthorne,  in  Wit  is  a  Constable, 
1639,  speaks  of  an  alderman's  thumb- 
ring.  Q  I  reads,  for  alderman, 
burgomaster. 

57.  atomies'}  tiny  beings,  pigmies. 
A'tTi'  Eng.  Diet,  quotes  P.  Wood- 
house,  Flea,  1605,  "  If  with  this  atomye 
I  should  contend."  Q  I  has  Aitomi, 
Q  2  ottamie,  the  rest  as  in  the  text. 


36  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACT  i. 

Her  waggon-spokes  made  of  long  spinners'  legs ; 

The  cover,  of  the  wings  of  grasshoppers  ;  60 

Her  traces,  of  the  smallest  spider's  web ; 

Her  collars,  of  the  moonshine's  watery  beams ; 

Her  whip,  of  cricket's  bone  ;  the  lash,  of  film  ; 

Her  waggoner,  a  small  grey-coated  gnat, 

Not  half  so  big  as  a  round  little  worm  65 

Prick'd  from  the  lazy  finger  of  a  maid : 

Her  chariot  is  an  empty  hazel-nut, 

Made  by  the  joiner  squirrel  or  old  grub, 

Time  out  o'  mind  the  fairies'  coach-makers. 

And  in  this  state  she  gallops  night  by  night          70 

Through  lovers'  brains,  and  then  they  dream  of  love  ; 

O'er    courtiers'    knees,    that     dream     on    court'sies 

straight ; 

O'er  lawyers'  fingers,  who  straight  dream  on  fees  ; 
O'er  ladies'  lips,  who  straight  on  kisses  dream, 
Which  oft  the  angry  Mab  with  blisters  plagues,    75 
Because  their  breaths  with  sweetmeats  tainted  are : 

59.  made,  of  long]  Q,  ]•'  ;  arc  made  of  O  I.  61.  Her']  O,  F;  The  O  i  ; 
spiders}  F,  spider  Q.  62.  Her}  Q,  F;  The  Q  I.  66.  Prick'd]  Q,  F; 
Pickt  O  i  ;  vi aid}  O  I  ;  man  Q,  F  ;  woman  Ff  2-4.  72.  O'er]  Q  I  (O're) ; 
On  Q,  F.  73.  dream]  Q,  dreamt  F.  76.  breaths'}  Rowe  ;  breathes  Q  I  ; 
breath  O,  F. 

59.   spinners^  spiders'.    Latimcr  (in         67.  He;' chariot}  Daniel  places  lines 

Fox's  Acts  and  Monuments)  :  ''Where  67-69  after  line  58,  as  suggested  by 

the  bee  gathercth  honey,   even  there  Lettsom  ;     the     description     of     the 

the  spinner  gathereth  venome. "  chariot  preceding    that    of   its    part-. 

65.   worm]  Halliwell  (Diet.)  quotes  These  lines,    not   found  in  Q   I,  may 

Beaumont     and     Fletcher,      Woman-  have  been  added— Lettsom  thinks — 

Hater  in.   i.  :    "  Keep    thy  hands  in  in  the  margin  of  the  "copy"  of  Q  2, 

thy  muff,  and  warm  the  idle  worms  in  and    have    been    misplaced    by    the 

thy  fingers' ends."     Worms  were  said  printer.       Drayton,     in    Nymphidia, 

to  breed  in  idle  fingers.      Banister  in  describes  Mab's  chariot,  with  evident 

his    Compendious    Chirurgiric  (1585)  reminiscences  of  this  speech, 
describes  women  "sitting  in  the  sun"          76.   sweetmeats}  M  alone  :    "kissing 

pricking   what    "we   commonly   call  comfits,"  mentioned  in  Merry  Wives, 

wormes"  from  their  fingers.  v.  v.  22. 


sc.  iv.]         ROMEO    AND   JULIET  37 

Sometime  she  gallops  o'er  a  courtier's  nose, 
And  then  dreams  he  of  smelling  out  a  suit ; 
And  sometime  comes  she  with  a  tithe-pig's  tail 
Tickling  a  parson's  nose  as  a'  lies  asleep,  80 

Then  dreams  he  of  another  benefice  ; 
Sometime  she  driveth  o'er  a  soldier's  neck, 
And  then  dreams  he  of  cutting  foreign  throats, 
Of  breaches,  ambuscadoes,  Spanish  blades, 
Of  healths  five  fathom  deep  ;   and  then  anon          8  5 
Drums  in  his  ear,  at  which  he  starts  and  wakes, 
And,  being  thus  frighted,  swears  a  prayer  or  t\vo, 
And  sleeps  again.      This  is  that  very  Mab 
That  plats  the  manes  of  horses  in  the  night, 
And  bakes  the  elf-locks  in  foul  sluttish  hairs,        90 
Which  once  untangled  much  misfortune  bodes ; 
This  is  the  hag,  when  maids  lie  on  their  backs, 
That  presses  them  and  learns  them  first  to  bear, 
Making  them  women  of  good  carriage ; 


77-  courtier's}  The  courtier  has  been  fathom  deep.     The  knight  has  drunk 

already  mentioned  ;  hence  Pope  read  so    much    Iiealth    to    the    gentleman 

lawyer  s  from  O   i.  but  lawyers  have  yonder,  etc." 

also  been  mentioned.     Seymour  con-  89.  flats  the  manes'}  Douce  tells  of 

jectured    laivyers     lip    (Q     i     laf]  ;  a  superstition  that  malignant  spirits, 

Collier  (MS.)   reads  counsellor 's.      In  clothed  in  white,  haunted  stables  and 

the  next  line  suit  would  be  proper  to  dropped  the  wax  of  tapers  on  horses' 

courtier — a  court  request,  or  in  a  legal  manes.      lie  refers  in  illustration  to  a 

sense   to   a   lawyer.     The  word  suit  print  by  Hans  Burgkmair. 

(of    clothes)    suggested     taylors     to  90.   bakes   the   elf-locks}    Pope    and 

Theobald.  others  read  cakes ;  Collier(MS. ) makes. 

84.  Spanish   blades}    toledoes.       Q  Klf-locks,   hair  matted  by   the   elves. 
I  reads  countermines.  Compare  Lear,   II.   iii.    10  :    "  elf   all 

85.  health?}  tickling  his  neck  makes  my  hair  in  knots. ';     O,   F  misprint: 
him    dream    of    drinking.       Malone  Elklocks. 

quotes   from    ll'estivard  Hoe,    1607  :  92.   backs']    So    Drayton,    in    Nym- 

"  My    master    and    Sir    Goslin    are  fht\lia,  of  Queen  Mab. 

guzzling  ;  they  are  dabbling  together  94.  -women   of  good  carriage}    So 


38  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACT  i. 

This  is  she — 

Rom.  Peace,  peace,  Mercutio,  peace!     95 

Thou  talk'st  of  nothing. 

Mer.  True,  I  talk  of  dreams, 

Which  are  the  children  of  an  idle  brain, 
Begot  of  nothing  but  vain  fantasy, 
Which  is  as  thin  of  substance  as  the  air, 
And  more  inconstant  than  the  wind,  who  wooes    100 
Even  now  the  frozen  bosom  of  the  north, 
And,  being  anger'd,  puffs  away  from  thence, 
Turning  his  face  to  the  dew-dropping  south. 

Ben.  This  wind  you  talk  of  blows  us  from  ourselves ; 

Supper  is  done,  and  we  shall  come  too  late.         105 

Rom.   I  fear,  too  early  :   for  my  mind  misgives 

Some  consequence,  yet  hanging  in  the  stars, 

Shall  bitterly  begin  his  fearful  date 

WTith  this  night's  revels,  and  expire  the  term 

Of  a  despised  life  closed  in  my  breast  I  10 

By  some  vile  forfeit  of  untimely  death : 

But  Pie,  that  hath  the  steerage  of  my  course, 

Direct  my  sail  !      On,  lusty  gentlemen. 

Ben.   Strike,  drum.  \Exennt. 


HOISJ  a  man  may  choose  a  good  "wife  /^<r;v<6%  935  :    "  endless  date  of  never- 

from  a  bad;    Hazlitt's  Dodsley's   Old  ending  woes." 

Plays,  ix.   p.    37:     "  You  have  been  109.   expire  the  term]  cause  the  term 

often  tried  To  he   a  woman  of  good  to  expire,  as  in  Lyly,  Eitphnes  (Arber, 

carriage"  —  spoken    with     an    equi-  p.    77):    "To  swill   the  drinke   that 

voque.  will  expyrc  thy  date.'' 

103.  face}  The  side  of  Q.  F  may  be  113.   sa/7]   If  stile  Q,    F    is    not    a 

right,    used,   as   elsewhere   in   Shake-  misprint,    it    may    be    explained    as 

speare,     of    bed  -  fellows,     and     thus  courtship ;    the   emendation  fate   has 

carrying  on  the  metaphor  of  wooing  been  proposed. 

the  bosom.  114.   Exeunt]   The   stage-direction 

108,  dalc\   season,    period  ;    as   in  F   seems    to    show   that    the   action 


sc.  v.J 


UOMEO    AND   .JULIET 


SCENIC  V. —  The  Same.      A  Hall  in  CapulcCs  House. 
Musicians  waiting'.     Enter  Seruingmen  ivitli  napkins. 

First  Scrv.  Where  's  Potpan,  that  he  helps  not  to 
takeaway?  He  shift  a  trencher!  he  scrape 
a  trencher  ! 

Second  Scri1.   When  good   manners  shall   lie  all   in 

one  or  two  men's   hands,  and   they  unwashed         5 
too,  'tis  a  foul  thing. 

First  Scrv.  Away  with  the  joint-stools,  remove  the 
court-cupboard,  look  to  the  plate.  Good 
thou,  save  me  a  piece  of  marchpane ;  and, 
as  thou  lovest  me,  let  the  porter  let  in  i  o 
Susan  Grindstone  and  Nell. — Antony !  and 
Potpan  ! 

Third  Serv.   Ay,  boy,  ready. 

First  Serv.  You    are    looked    for    and    called    for, 


proceeded  without  interruption  : 
"They  march  about  the  Stage, 
and  Servingmen  come  forth  with 
their  napkins."  So  Qq,  omitting 
their  and  adding  Enter  Romeo. 


\.  First  Serv.]  I  distribute  the 
speeches  as  I  think  is  intended  in  Q. 
I  suppose  Third  Serv.  to  be  the 
much  needed  I'otpan  and  Fourth 
Serv.  to  he  Antony.  F  perhaps 
economised  actors  by  reducing  the 
speakers  to  three.  Dyce  effected 
the  reduction  to  two,  and  reads  in 
11,12  Antony  Polfan  '. 

2.  shift  a  trencher'.}  I'otpan  is  too 
proud  for  such  work. 


7.  joint-stooli\  a    stool   made   with 
jointed     parts.       The     three-legged 
stool  is  so   named   in   Cowper's    The 
Task  (opening  of  15.  i. ). 

8.  fourt-citp!>oard\   a    sideboard    or 
cabinet,    used   to   display   plate.       So 
Chapman,    Mans.    D'Olire.:     "Here 
shall  stand   my   court  cupboard   \\illi 
its  furniture  of  plate/' 

9.  marchpane\  a    kind    of  almond 
cake.       See    Xares'     Glossary    for    a. 
receipt    (l6oS),     and     for    many    ex- 
amples of  the  word. 

13.  Third  Serv.]  I  suppose  that 
Third  and  Fourth  Servants  (Antony 
and  Potpan  ?)  enter  here. 


40  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACTI. 

asked     for    and     sought    for,     in     the     great      1 5 
chamber. 

Fourth  Serv.   We    cannot    be    here    and    there   too. 
— Cheerly,    boys ;    be    brisk    awhile,   and    the 
longer   liver  take   all.  [T/iey  retire  behind. 

Enter  CAPULET,  with  JULIET  and  others  of  his  house, 
meeting  the  Guests  and  Maskers. 

Cap.   Welcome,  gentlemen!  ladies  that  have  their  toes     20 
Unplagued  with  corns  will  have  a  bout  with  you  :— 
Ah  ha,  my  mistresses  !   which  of  you  all 
Will     now     deny     to     dance  ?      she     that     makes 

dainty, 
She,  I  '11  swear,  hath  corns ;    am    I    come  near  ye 

now  ? — 

Welcome,  gentlemen  !      I  have  seen  the  da}'-          2  5 
That  I  have  worn  a  visor,  and  could  tell 
A  whispering  tale  in  a  fair  lady's  ear, 
Such    as    would    please ;    'tis    gone,  'tis    gone,   'tis 

gone : — 

19.  Enter  .  .  .  ]  Enter  all  the  guests  and  gentlewomen  to  the  Maskers 
Q,  F.  21.  have  a  bout}  Capell  ;  have  about  (£  i  ;  walke  about  Q,  F;  walk 
a  bout  Daniel.  22.  Ah  ha,  my}  Q  I  ;  Ah  my  Q,  F. 

19.  longer    live)-}    Proverbial :     so  ing,  as  Daniel  thinks,  occurs  in  Much 
Dekker,    Honest    Whore,    Part    II.:  Ado,    n.    i.    89;    but    we   cannot    be 
"  If  I   have  meat  to  my  mouth,  and  sure    that   walk  about  in   J\Iuch  Ado 
rags  to   my  back.    .   .    .   when  I  die,  refers  to  the  dance. 

the  longer  liver  take  all"  (Pearson's  23.   makes    dainty'}     is     chary     (of 

Dekker,  ii.  p.  115).  (lancing).     New   Eng.    Did.    quotes 

20.  gentlemen}  For  gentlemen  as  a  Preston,   New    Cov.   (1628):    "make 
dissyllable,  see  Walker,  Sliakespeare 's  not  dainty  of  applying  the  promises." 
Versification,  xxxiv.  24.   come  near}   Schmidt:     "touch 

21.  have   a    i/ouf}    Daniel    defends  to  the  quick,"  as  in  1  Henry  IV.  I. 
•walk  a  bout :  to  tread  a  measure  or  to  ii.  14. 

walk  a  meastire  is  common,  and  here         25.    lVel(ome~\    Addressed     to     the 
the  bout  is  a  bout  of  dancing.     The     masked  friends  of  Romeo  (Delius). 
«ame  expression  with  the  same  mean- 


sc.  v.j          ROMEO    AND   JULIET  41 

You    are  welcome,   gentlemen  ! — Come,  musicians, 

play.— 

A  hall,  a  hall  !   give  room,  and  foot  it,  girls. —      30 
[Music  plays,  and  they  dance. 
More  light,  you  knaves  !   and  turn  the  tables  up, 
And  quench  the  fire,  the  room  is  grown  too  hot. — 
Ah,  sirrah,  this  unlook'd-for  sport  comes  well. — 
Nay,  sit,  nay,  sit,  good  cousin  Capulet, 
For  you  and  I  are  past  our  dancing  days  ;  3  5 

How  long  is  't  now  since  last  yourself  and  I 
Were  in  a  mask  ? 

Second  Cap.  By  'r  Lady,  thirty  years. 

Cap.  What,  man  !  'tis  not  so  much,  'tis  not  so  much : 
Tis  since  the  nuptial  of  Lucentio, 
Come  Pentecost  as  quickly  as  it  will,  40 

Some  five-and-twenty  years  ;  and  then  we  mask'd. 

Second  Cap.   'Tis  more,  'tis  more  :   his  son  is  elder,  sir  ; 
His  son  is  thirty. 

Cap.  Will  you  tell  me  that  ? 

His  son  was  but  a  ward  two  years  ago. 

Rom.  What  lady  is  that  which  doth  enrich  the  hand    45 

29.  gentlemen! — Come,~\  gentlemen   come,  Q.          30.   a  hall\  Q,   Hall  F. 
Music  .    .   .   ]    after  line  29  Q,    F.          39.   Lucentio}  Q   I,  F  ;    Lucientio  (^. 
43.  Cap.]  Q,  3  Cap.  F.         44.  two]  Q,  F  ;  three  Q  I.         45.  lady  is}  Q  i,  Qq 
3-5,  Ff ;  Ladies  Q  ;  lady ' s  several  editors. 

30.  A  hall .']  A  cry  to  make  room     Italy.      In  Brooke's  poem  the  time  is 
in  a  crowd,  as  in  Middleton,  Enter-     mid  winter. 

tainment  at  Lord  Mayors,  1623  (ed.  34.   consin~\  kinsman  ;   see    Hamlet 

Bullen,   vii.   373):    "A  hall!  a  hall!  (ed.     Dowden),    I.    ii.     64.        Uncle 

below,  stand  clear."  Capulet,  of  the  list  of  invitations,   is 

31.  turn  the  tables  ztf]  turn  up  the  probably  addressed. 

leaves  of  the  tables.     Singer  quotes         44.   His  .   .   .  ago]  After   this   line 

Cavendish,  Life  of  IVolsey  (ed.    1825,  Q  I   adds  a  pleasing  line,   continued 

p.  198):    "  After  that  the  board's  end  to  Capulet:    "Good    youths   I   (  —  z'') 

was  taken  up."  faith.     Oh  youth  's  a  jolly  thing." 

32.  fire]  The  time  is  mid  July  in 


42  ROMEO    AND   JULIET  [ACTI. 

Of  yonder  knight  ? 

Serv.  I  know  not,  sir. 

Rom.  O,  she  doth  teach  the  torches  to  burn  bright ! 
It  seems  she  hangs  upon  the  cheek  of  night 
Like  a  rich  jewel  in  an  Ethiop's  ear ; 
Beauty  too  rich  for  use,  for  earth  too  dear  !  5  o 

So  shows  a  snowy  dove  trooping  with  crows, 
As  yonder  lady  o'er  her  fellows  shows. 
The  measure  done,  I  '11  watch  her  place  of  stand, 
And,  touching  hers,  make  blessed  my  rude  hand. 
Did  my  heart  love  till  now  ?   forswear  it,  sight !     5  5 
For  I  ne'er  saw  true  beauty  till  this  night. 

Tyb.  This,  by  his  voice,  should  be  a  Montague. — 

Fetch    me    my    rapier,    boy.  —  What !     dares     the 

slave 
Come  hither,  cover'd  with  an  antic  face, 

48.  //  seems  she}  Q  I,  Qq,  F  ;  Her  beauty  Ff  2-4.  49.  Like}  O  i,  Ff  2-4  ; 
4s,  Q>  F.  54-  blessed}  Q,  F;  happy  Q  I.  55.  now?}  Q  I  ;  now,  O,  F. 
56.  For  I  ne'er}  Q,  For  I  never  F,  /  never  Q  I.  58.  What !  dares} 
Theobald  ;  What  dares  Q,  F  ;  What  ?  dares  Q  5. 

46,  47.  knight  ?  .   .   .  torches}  Ma-  Possibly  one  may  detect  faint  echoes 

lone  notes  that  Painter's  novel  has  a  here    of  1    Henry     VI.    v.     iii.     45- 

lord,    Brooke's   poem  has  a   knight:  71     (Suffolk    with    Margaret    in    his 

"  With  torch  in  hand  a  comely  knight  hand),    touching    of    hands,    kissing 

did  fetch  her  forth  to   dance."     The  fingers,  the  image  of  a  swan  (see  note 

complete  forgetfulness  of  Rosaline  is  on  line  51),  "  senses  rough,'' and  "So 

also  in  Brooke's  poem.  seems  this  gorgeous   beauty  to   mine 

48.   //  seems  sJie}  The   reading    Ff  eyes."       Both    passages    express    the 

2-4  Her  beauty  is  adopted  by  many  sudden  tyranny  of  beauty. 
editors;  Daniel  thinks  that  Beauty  in         49.   Fthiop's     ear}      Holt      White 

line    50    requires    beatify    here.      But  quotes  Lyly,  Euphues  :   "  A  fair  pearl 

how  came  all  the  early  editions,   in-  in    a    Morian's    ear."     Scoloker,    in 

eluding  Q    i.   to  read   It  seems^     If  Da$7ianties(l6O4),"p,  II,  ed.  Grosart, 

Her  beauty  be    an    improvement,    it  echoes    this    passage:     "Or   a   faire 

may  be    the   improvement  of  a  stage  Jewell  by  an  Fthiope  worne. " 
Romeo,      and      not       Shakespeare's.          51.   So  .    .   .  crows}  Q   I   has   "So 

Steevens  quotes  Sonnets,  xxvii.  :  shines    a   snow-white   Swan  trouping 

"  Which  [thy  shadow],   like  a  jewel  with  Crowes." 

hung  in  ghastly  night,  59.   antic  face}  Romeo's    fantastic 

Makes  black  night  beauteous."  mask, 


sc.  v.J  ROMEO    AND   JULIET  43 

To  fleer  and  scorn  at  our  solemnity  ?  60 

Now,  by  the  stock  and  honour  of  my  kin, 
To  strike  him  dead  I  hold  it  not  a  sin. 

Cap.   Why,  how  now,  kinsman  !   wherefore  storm  you  so  ? 

Tyb.   Uncle,  this  is  a  Montague,  our  foe  ; 

A  villain  that  is  hither  come  in  spite,  65 

To  scorn  at  our  solemnity  this  night. 

Cap.  Young  Romeo  is  it  ? 

Tyb.  'Tis  he,  that  villain  Romeo. 

Cap.  Content  thee,  gentle  coz,  let  him  alone, 
He  bears  him  like  a  portly  gentleman  ; 
And,  to  say  truth,  Verona  brags  of  him  70 

To  be  a  virtuous  and  well-govern'd  youth  : 
I  would  not  for  the  wealth  of  all  this  town 
Here  in  my  house  do  him  disparagement ; 
Therefore  be  patient,  take  no  note  of  him  : 
It  is  my  will,  the  which  if  thou  respect,  /  5 

Show  a  fair  presence  and  put  off  these  frowns, 
An  ill-beseeming  semblance  for  a  feast. 

Tyb.    It  fits,  when  such  a  villain  is  a  guest : 
I  '11  not  endure  him. 

Cap.  lie  shall  be  endured: 

What,  goodman  boy  !    I  say  he  shall :   go  to  ;         So 

Am  I  the  master  here,  or  you  ?   go  to. 

You  '11  not  endure  him  !      God  shall  mend  my  soul, 

67.   it?]  F,  //.  Q.         69.  H<]  0  i  ;  .-/  Q,  F.         72.  this]  Q,  the  F. 

60.  fleer'}  laugh  mockingly,  as  in  (used  specially  of  marriage  festivities), 

Much  Ado,  \ .  i.  58.  Primarily  to  frequent  in  Shakespeare.  Compare 

make  a  wry  face;  Palsgrave,  Les-  solemn,  as  in  Macbeth,  in.  i.  15: 

flarcissement  \  "I  fleere,  I  make  an  ''  To-night  we  hold  a  solemn  supper.'1 

evil  countenance  with  the  mouthe  by  6q.  portly'}  of  dignity,  as  in  Spenser, 

uncoveryng  of  the  tethe. "  Sonnet  v.  :  ''portly  pride"  and 

60.    solemnity'}    dignified    festivity  "  such  portlinesse  is  honour.'' 


44  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  [ACTI. 

You  '11  make  a  mutiny  among  my  guests ! 
You  will  set  cock-a-hoop  !  you  '11  be  the  man  ! 

Tyb.  Why,  uncle,  'tis  a  shame. 

Cap.  Go  to,  go  to ;  85 

You  are  a  saucy  boy  :  is  't  so  indeed  ? 
This  trick  may  chance  to  scathe  you, — I  know  what : 
You  must  contrary  me  !   marry,  'tis  time. — 
Well  said,  my  hearts  ! — You  are  a  princox  ;  go  : 
Be    quiet,    or  —  More     light,    more     light !  —  For 
shame !  90 

I  '11  make  you  quiet. — What !   cheerly,  my  hearts  ! 

Tyb.   Patience  perforce  with  wilful  choler  meeting 

Makes  my  flesh  tremble  in  their  different  greeting. 
I  will  withdraw :  but  this  intrusion  shall,  94 

Now  seeming  sweet,  convert  to  bitter  gall.         \Exit. 

83.  my}  Q,  the  F.         90.  or  .   .  .  shame !]  or  more  ,   .   .  light  for  shame, 
Q,  F.         95.  bitter}  bittrest  Q  (alone). 

84.  cock-a-hoop}New  Eng.  Diet,  says  on  second  syllable.  J.  Hooker,  Girald. 
"of  doubtful  origin,"  and  its  history  Ireland  in    Holinshed :    "The    more 
further   obscured  by  attempts  to  an-  noble   were    his    good    and   worthie 
alyse  it ;  various  conjectures  are  given,  attempts,  the   more   he   was  crossed 
"  To  set  (the)  cock  on  (the)  hoop,  ap-  and  contraried"  (New  Eng.  Diet.). 
parently  to  turn  on  the  tap,   let  the         89.    princox}     a     forward     youth, 
liquor    flow  ;     hence    drink    without  Steevens   quotes    The    Return   from 
stint,"  and,  by  extension,  give  a  loose  Parnassus,      1606:      "Your      proud 
to    all    disorder.       New   Eng.    Diet.  University     princox."       Archbishop 
cites,  among  other  examples,  Daus.  tr.  Bancroft,    angry    with    young    Tobie 
Sleidan 's   Comm.,    1560:    "  There  be  Matthew,  addresses  him  as  a   "  Prin- 
found      divers    .    .    .    which      setting  cox "    in   Matthew's   unpublished  ac- 
cocke    on   hoope  beleve    nothinge  at  count  of  his  conversion. 

all,  neither  regard  they  what  reason.          92.   Patience  perforce}   compulsory 

what    honesty,    or    what    thing   con-  patience,     a     proverbial     expression, 

science  doth  prescribe."  Steevens  quotes  the  adage,  "Patience 

86.  ts't   so]  I    understand    this    to  perforce  is  a  medicine  for  a  mad  dog, " 
refer  to  Tybalt's  'tis  a  shame.     Fur-  or,  as  Nares  has  it,  "a  mad  horse." 
ness  seems   to   approve  Ulrici's  sup-         95.  Now  .   .   .  gall}  Hudson,    fol- 
position    that    it    is    an    answer    to    a  lowing    Lettsom,   regards   con-vert   as 
remark  of  some  guest.  transitive,   governing   sweet  (substan- 

87.  scathe}  injure  ;  used  by  Shake-  tive),   and  reads,   Now-seeming  sweet 
speare  as  a  verb  only  here.  convert.     "  Convert "  (intrans.)  occurs 

88.  contrary}  oppose,  cross ;  accent  several  times  in  Shakespeare. 


sc.v.]          ROMEO   AND   JULIET  45 

Rom.   [To  Juliet.]    If    I    profane    with    my    unworthiest 

hand 

This  holy  shrine,  the  gentle  sin  is  this, 
My  lips,  two  blushing  pilgrims,  ready  stand 

To  smooth  that  rough  touch  with  a  tender  kiss. 
Jid,    Good     pilgrim,    you     do    wrong     your     hand     too 
much,  100 

Which  mannerly  devotion  shows  in  this  ; 
For  saints  have  hands  that  pilgrims'  hands  do  touch, 

And  palm  to  palm  is  holy  palmers'  kiss. 
Rom.   Have  not  saints  lips,  and  holy  palmers  too  ? 
Jul.  Ay,  pilgrim,  lips  that  they  must  use  in  prayer.     105 
Rom.  O,  then,  dear  saint,  let  lips  do  what  hands  do ; 

They  pray,  grant  thou,  lest  faith  turn  to  despair. 
Jul.   Saints    do    not    move,    though    grant     for    prayers' 

sake. 
Rom.   Then  move  not,  while  my  prayer's  effect  I  take. 

96.  itnworthicst}  Q,  F  ;  unworthie,  Q  i.         97.  sift]  Q,  Q  3,  Ff ;  sinne  Q  I , 
Ql  4>  5-         98-  ready}  Q  i,  (^  5,  Ff  2-4;  did  readie  (,),  F.          102.  hands 
that]  Q  5  ;  hands,  t)tat  Q,  F.  109.  prayer's  effect  I  take}  Capell  ;  prayers 
effect  I  take  Q  I,  Q,  F  ;  prayers  effect  doe  lake  Ff  2-4. 

97.  sin}  I  retain  this  word,  which  possible  reading  which  occurs  to  me 
has    the    authority   of    all    the    early  is,  "  the  gentle  sin  in  this, "  the  gentle 
texts.      Many  editors  follow  Theobald  and  courteous  take  your  hand,  but  if 
in  adopting  Warburton's  proposal_/?«c,  it  is  profanation,  I  will  atone  for  it. 
and  it  would  have  been  easy  to  mis-  The  sin  is  referred  to,  lines  111-113. 
take  fine  for  sinne  (with   a  long  s).  "  Tho'  gentle"  has  been  suggested  to 
Fine,    i.    right,    would    mean    mulct,  me  by  Professor  Littledale. 

and    would    refer    to    the    kiss.     The          100.  pilgrim}     Halliwell    gives    a 

clash  in  sound   of  shrine  and  fine  is  sketch  by  Inigo  Jones  which  shows  a 

not  pleasing.      I  take  the  whole  speech  pilgrim's  costume,  such  as  was  worn, 

to  be  a  request  for  permission  to  kiss  ;  it  is  believed  on  the  evidence  of  this 

to  touch  Tulict  at  all  is  sin  ;  but  the  line  and  probably  of  stage  tradition, 

profanation   with   Romeo's  hand  is  a  by    Romeo  ;    the    loose    large-sleeved 

rough   sin  ;  to  touch  with  his  lips  is  gown  with  cape,  broad-leafed  hat,  a 

"the    gentle    sin."      A    very    slight  pilgrim's  staff  in  the  left  hand, 
emendation,  which,  I  think,  has  not          109.   /  take}   This    line    completes 

been  proposed,    "the  gentler  sin   is  what     is     virtually    a     Shakesperian 

this,"  would  make  it  clearer.    Another  sonnet  in  dialogue. 


46  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  [ACTI. 

Thus  from  my  lips,  by  thine,  my  sin  is  purged,    i  i  o 

{Kissing  her. 

Jul.  Then  have  my  lips  the  sin  that  they  have  took. 
Rom.  Sin  from  my  lips  ?      O  trespass  sweetly  urged  ! 

Give  me  my  sin  again. 

Jul.  You  kiss  by  the  book. 

Nurse.   Madam,  your  mother  craves  a  word  with  you. 
Rom.   What  is  her  mother? 
Nurse.  Marry,  bachelor,  i  1 5 

Her  mother  is  the  lady  of  the  house, 

And  a  good  lady,  and  a  wise,  and  virtuous  : 

I  nursed  her  daughter  that  you  talk'd  withal ; 

I  tell  you  he  that  can  lay  hold  of  her 

Shall  have  the  chinks. 
Rom.  Is  she  a  Capulet  ?  120 

O  dear  account !   my  life  is  my  foe's  debt. 
Ben.   Away,  be  gone ;   the  sport  is  at  the  best. 
Rom.  Ay,  so  I  fear ;  the  more  is  my  unrest. 
Cap.   Nay,  gentlemen,  prepare  not  to  be  gone  ; 

We  have  a  trifling  foolish  banquet  towards. —     125 

no.  thine}  Q,  F  ;  yours  O  i. 

no.  Kissing  her]  Shakespeare,  says  O  I  has  //trail  for  debt.  Cambridge 
Mulune,  copied  from  the  mode  of  his  editors  conjecture  that  the  rhyming 
own  time.  Compare  Henry  VIII.  I. 
iv.  29. 

113.  by  tli 

way;  there  is  here  probably  no  refer- 
ence  to  any  Book  of  Manners. 

115.    IVliat}  Who,  as  frequently  in     over  when  the  game  is  at  the  fairest. 
Shakespeare.     Compare  line  131.  See  I.  iv.  39. 

1 20.  chinks}       cash;      Cotgravc,          125.   ban/juet     towards}     Towards, 
"  Quinquaille,  chinkes,  coyne.''  ready,  at  hand,  as  toward  in  Hamlet, 

121.  debt}  Slaunton   explains:   Be-  I.  i.  77.      Banquet,  a  course  of  sweet- 
reft  of  Juliet  he  should  die,  therefore  meats,    fruit,   and   wine.     New    Eng. 
his  life  is  at  Capulct's  mercy;  so  in  Diet,  quotes  Cogan,  Haven  of  Health, 
Brooke's  poem  :    "Thus  hath  his  foe  1588:    "Yea,    and    after    supper    for 
in  choyse  to  give  him  life  or  death."  fear  lest  they  be   not  full  gorged,   to 


sc.v.]  ROMEO    AND   JULIET  17 

Is  it  e'en  so?      Why  then,  I  thank  you  all  ; 

I  thank  you,  honest  gentlemen  ;  good  night— 

More  torches  here  ! — Come  on,  then  let 's  to  bed. 

Ah,  sirrah,  by  my  fay,  it  waxes  late;  i  29 

I  '11  to  my  rest.        \Exeunt  all  but  Juliet  and  Nurse, 
Jnl.  Come  hither,  nurse.      What  is  yond  gentleman  ? 
Nurse.   The  son  and  heir  of  old  Tibcrio. 
ful.  What 's  he  that  now  is  going  out  of  door  ? 
Nurse.   Marry,  that,  I  think,  be  young  Petruchio. 
Jul.  What 's    he    that     follows    there,    that     would    not 
dance  ?  135 

Nurse.    I  know  not. 
Jul.   Go,  ask  his  name. — If  he  be  married, 

My  grave  is  like  to  be  my  wedding  bed. 
Nurse.   His  name  is  Romeo,  and  a  Montague  ; 

The  only  son  of  your  great  enemy.  140 

Jul.   My  only  love  sprung  from  my  only  hate  ! 

Too  early  seen  unknown,  and  known  too  late  ! 

Prodigious  birth  of  love  it  is  to  me, 

That  I  must  love  a  loathed  enemy. 
Nurse.  What 's  this  ?   what 's  this  ? 
Jul.  A  rhyme  I  learn'd  even  now.      145 

Of  one  I  danced  withal.     \_Onc  calls  within,  "Juliet." 


have  a  delicate  banqucf,  with  almnd-  dialogue    between    Juliet    and    Xur.^e 

ance   ol    wine."'     See    Taming  oj  tlic  was  suggested  by  Brooke's  poem. 

Skreu',  v.  ii.  9.  137,  138.   //'  .   .   .   bcd\   Uttered  to 

126.   ecu  .w .']  O  I   has  stage-direc-  herself,      while     the     Nurse     makes 

tion,  "  They  whisper  in  his  care,"  i.e.  inquiry, 

their  reasons  for  going.  143.   Prodigious}  Portentous,   as  in 

131.    Conic     hither,      nurse]     The  Midsummer  Night's  Dream,  v.  i.  419. 


48  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACTII. 

Nurse.  Anon,  anon  ! — 

Come,  let 's  away ;  the  strangers  all  are  gone. 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  II 

Enter  CHORUS. 

Chor.  Now  old  Desire  doth  in  his  death-bed  lie. 

And  young  Affection  gapes  to  be  his  heir : 
That  fair  for  which  love  groarid  for  and  would  die, 

With  tender  Juliet  match  d,  is  now  not  fair. 
Now  Romeo  is  beloved  and  loves  again^  5 

Alike  bewitched  by  the  charm  of  looks, 
But  to  his  foe  supposed  he  must  complain, 

And  she    steal   loves   sweet   bait  from  fearful 

hooks  : 
Being  held  a  foe,  he  may  not  have  access 

To  breathe  such  vows  as  lovers  use  to  swear  ;    I  o 
And  she  as  much  in  love,  Jier  means  mucli  less 

To  meet  Jier  new-beloved  any  where  : 
But  passion  lends  them  power,  time  means,  to  meet, 
Tempering  extremities  with  extreme  sweet. 

[Exit. 

4.   match'd]  F,  match  Q. 

Chorui\  There  being  no  division  of  examples  from  Swinburn's  Briefe 

Acts  or  Scenes  in  the  early  texts,  Treatise  of  Testaments,  1590:  "such 

editors  may  place  the  Chorus  at  end  as  do  gape  for  greater  bequests,"  and 

of  Act  I.,  or,  as  here,  by  way  of  pro-  "  to  gape  and  crie  upon  the  testator." 

logue  to  Act  n.  As  it  refers  more  3.  fair]  Frequent  in  Shakespeare 

to  the  future  than  the  past,  I  follow  for  a  beautiful  person,  and  also  in  the 

the  Cambridge  editors  in  placing  it  sense  of  beauty  ;  I  think  the  former 

here.  Some  critics  doubt  that  it  is  is  the  meaning  here.  As  to  the  re- 

by  Shakespeare.  peated/i?r  in  this  line,  compare  AlVs 

2.  gapes]  Rushton  (Shakespeare's  Well,  I.  ii.  29:  "But  on  us  both  did 

Testamentary  Language,  p.  29)  quotes  haggish  age  steal  on." 


sc.  i.]  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  49 

SCENE  I. —  Verona.     A  lane  by  the  wall  of 
Capulefs  orcJtanl. 

Enter  RoMKO. 

Rom.   Can  I  go  forward  when  my  heart  is  here  ? 

Turn  back,  dull  earth,  and  find  thy  centre  out. 

\_I Ic  climbs  tlic  wall,  and  leaps  down  within  it. 

Enter  BF.NVOLIO  and  MFRCUTIO. 

Ben.  Romeo  !   my  cousin  Romeo  !   Romeo  ! 

Mer.  He  is  wise  ; 

And,  on  my  life,  hath  stol'n  him  home  to  bed. 
Ben.   He  ran  this  way,  and  leap'd  this  orchard  wall :        5 

Call,  good  Mercutio. 
Mcr.  Nay,  I  '11  conjure  too. — 

Romeo  !   humours  !   madman  !   passion  !  lover  ! 

Appear  thou  in  the  likeness  of  a  sigh : 

Speak  but  one  rhyme  and  I  am  satisfied ; 

Cry    but    "  Ay    me  !  "    pronounce   but    "  love "    and 
"dove";  10 

A    lane  .   .   .]    Camb.    editors.  2.    lie    climbs  .    .    .]    Steevens.  3. 

Romeo!  Romeo /]  (),  F  ;  Romeo  (^  I.  6.  Nay  .  .  .  too}  given  to  Mercutio 
Q  r>  Ql  4>  5  ;  continued  to  Benvolio  Q,  O  3,  Ff.  7.  Romeo}  Qq  4,  5  ; 
Mer.  Romeo  (),  Q  3,  Ff;  passion!  lover'.}  passion  loner  Q  (commas  in  F). 
10.  Cry]  Q,  Cry  me  F  ;  pronounce}  O  i,  Qq  4,  5  ;  provaunt  Q  ;  provant  F  ; 
dove]  Q  i  ;  day  Q,  F  ;  die  Qq  4,  5. 

A   lane  .   .   .]   Perhaps  some  stage  7']  Singer  (ed.  2)  reads  Humour  s- 

furniture     representing     a    wall    was  madman !      fassion  -  lover ;       Daniel 

introduced,  which,  as  Daniel  suggests,  humorous        -madman!       passionate 

may    have    been    withdrawn,     when  lover! 

Mercutio  and  Benvolio  depart.  10.   Ay  me]  as  in  Spenser,   Virgil's 

2.   earth]  body.     So  Sonnefs,  cxlvi..  Gnat,  353,  "Ay  me,  that  thankes  so 

"Poor  soul,   the  centre  of  my  sinful  much    should   faile    of  meed."     Cor- 

earlh."     Ff  2-4  read  my  centre.  rupted  in  F  2  to  ay  me.     Theobald  and 

6.  conjure}     Accented      on      first  others  Ah  me! 

syllable     as     here     in     Midsummer-  10.  pronounce}     F     2     alters     the 

Night's  Dream,  ill.  ii.  158.  f reran'    of     F"     to     coup'.y,     whence 


50 


ROMEO   AND   JULIET 


[ACT  ii. 


Speak  to  my  gossip  Venus  one  fair  word, 

One  nickname  for  her  purblind  son  and  heir, 

Young  Adam  Cupid,  he  that  shot  so  trim 

When  King  Cophetua  loved  the  beggar-maid.— 

He  heareth  not,  he  stirreth  not,  he  moveth  not ;    I  5 

The  ape  is  dead,  and  I  must  conjure  him. — 

I  conjure  thee  by  Rosaline's  bright  eyes, 

By  her  high  forehead,  and  her  scarlet  lip, 

By  her  fine  foot,  straight  leg,  and  quivering  thigh, 

12.  heir]  Q  i,  Qq  4,  5  ;  her  Q,  F.  13.  Adam  Cupid]  Sleevens  (Upton 
conj.);  Abraham:  Cupid  Q  I,  Qq  2,  3  ;  Abraham  Cupid  Qq  4,  5  Ff;  trim'} 
Q  i  ;  true  Q,  F.  16.  ami]  Q,  omitted  F. 


Rowc's     couple,    adopted    by    many 
editors. 

13.  Adam  Cupid]  Upton's  con- 
jecture Adam  (easily  misread  Abram} 
is  generally  accepted,  the  allusion 
being  to  the  great  archer,  Adam  Bell, 
famous  in  ballad  poetry.  Compare 
Much  Ado,  I.  i.  260:  "shoot  at 
me  ;  and  he  that  hits  me  let  him  be 
clapped  on  the  shoulder,  and  called 
Adam.''''  The  Abraham  of  Q  I,  Qq,  Ff 
may  be  right.  If  the  source  of  the 
Cophetua  ballad  were  found,  which 
may  lurk  in  some  old  book  on  Africa, 
a  bowman  named  Abraham  might  be 
discovered.  An  Ethiopian  king  (448- 
470)  was  so  named.  If  "young 
Abraham "  is  named  after  the  patri- 
arch, the  nickname  must  mean 
"father  of  many  nations"'  (Genesis 
xvii.  5),  not  wholly  inappropriate  to 
Cupid.  Knight  supposed  that  cheat 
was  meant,  the  allusion  being  to  the 
Abraham-men  of  Elizabethan  days — 
vagabonds,  bare  -  armed  and  bare  - 
legged,  pretending  madness.  In  S. 
Rowlands'  Martin  Mark-all  (about 
1609),  he  gives  Abram  as  a  slang 
word  meaning  mad.  In  Street 
Kobberies  consider' a  (about  1700) 
Abram  is  given  as  a  cant  word  for 
naked,  which  would  suit  Cupid  well, 


but,  though  clearly  a  relic  of  the 
Abraham-men,  I  have  found  no  earlier 
example  in  this  sense.  Again,  as 
Theobald  observed,  abraham  and 
abram  are  old  spellings  of  auburn 
(e.g.  Coriolanus,  II.  iii.  21,  F  text); 
many  examples  might  be  cited. 
Italian  poets  name  Cupid  "II  biondo 
Dio,"  and  \V.  Thomas,  Principal 
Rules  of  the  Italian  Grammer,  1567, 
explains  biondo,  as  "the  aberne 
(auburn)  colour,  that  is  betwene  white 
and  yelow."  "White  reads  "  auburn1' 
here.  Finally,  the  nickname  may  be 
an  allusion  to  some  forgotten  Eliza- 
bethan contemporary,  whose  name 
(such,  for  example,  as  S[ir]  Abra\]iani\ 
/^Krnnan,  who  wrote  verses  in  the 
British  Museum  copy  of  Nash's  Jack 
ll'i/.'oit)  or  whose  fame  in  archery 
invited  a  jest. 

13.  /rim]  The  trim  of  Q  i  pre- 
serves a  word  of  the  ballad  "King 
Cophetua  and  the  Beggar  Maid," 
given  in  Percy's  Keliques  :  "The 
blinded  boy  that  shoots  so  trim."  In 
Love's  Lahour's  Lost,  I.  ii.  117.  the 
ballad  is  spoken  of  as  written  "some 
three  ages  since." 

15.  stirreth]  Q  3  (alone)  reads 
sf  rivet  h. 


sc.i.l  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  51 

And  the  demesnes  that  there  adjacent  lie,  20 

That  in  thy  likeness  thou  appear  to  us  ! 

Ben.   An  if  he  hear  thee,  thou  wilt  anger  him. 

Mcr.   This  cannot  anger  him  :   'twould  anger  him 
To  raise  a  spirit  in  his  mistress'  circle 
Of  some  strange  nature,  letting  it  there  stand        25 
Till  she  had  laid  it,  and  conjured  it  down  ; 
That  were  some  spite  :   my  invocation 
Is  fair  and  honest,  and  in  his  mistress'  name 
I  conjure  only  but  to  raise  up  him. 

Ben.   Come,  he  hath  hid  himself  among  these  trees,      30 
To  be  consorted  with  the  humorous  night : 
Blind  is  his  love  and  best  befits  the  dark. 

Mcr.    If  love  be  blind,  love  cannot  hit  the  mark. 
Now  will  he  sit  under  a  medlar-tree, 
And  wish  his  mistress  were  that  kind  of  fruit         35 
As  maids  call  medlars  when  they  laugh  alone. 
O,  Romeo,  that  she  were,  O,  that  she  were 
An  open  et  cetera,  thou  a  poperin  pear  ! 
Romeo,  good  night :    I  '11  to  my  truckle-bed  ; 
This  field-bed  is  too  cold  for  me  to  sleep  :  40 

22.  An]  Theobald  ;  An. I  O.  F.  2=5.  th<.yc\  Q,  omitted  F.  28.  anJ 
in}  V,  in  O.  30.  these]  n,  F  ;  those  n  I.  38.  open  et  cetera,  ///^/J  n  I, 
Malone  ;  open,  or  thou  O,  F. 


36.  medlars]  See  Halliwell 


suppressed  name. 

t    cetera}     Used,     a 
substitute  for  a  suppressed  unbecom- 


ing word),  in  Cotgrave.  under  Ber^a- 


Ovid  frequently  uses  cetera 


52  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACTH. 

Come,  shall  we  go? 

Ben.  Go,  then  ;  for  'tis  in  vain 

To  seek  him  here  that  means  not  to  be  found. 

\Exeunt. 

SCENE  II. —  The  Same.      Capulefs  Orchard. 

ROMEO  advances. 

Rom.   He  jests  at  scars  that  never  felt  a  wound. — 

\_Juliet  appears  above  at  a  window. 
But,   soft !     what    light     through     yonder    window 

breaks  ? 

It  is  the  east,  and  Juliet  is  the  sun  ! — 
Arise,  fair  sun,  and  kill  the  envious  moon, 
Who  is  already  sick  and  pale  with  grief,  5 

That  thou  her  maid  art  far  more  fair  than  she : 
Be  not  her  maid,  since  she  is  envious  ; 
Her  vestal  livery  is  but  sick  and  green, 
And  none  but  fools  do  wear  it ;  cast  it  off. — 
It  is  my  lady  ;   O,  it  is  my  love  !  I  o 

Capulet's  Orchard]  Globe.          S.   sick]  O,  T;  pak  O  I. 

the  sense  camp-bed  :   line  897,  "  Loe  argues  that  Scene  i.  is  in  the  orchard, 

here    a    fielde  (she    shewd   a  fielabed  and  he  here  continues  the  scene, 

ready  dight),  etc."    This  is  an  example  i.   He  jests]  Referring  to  Mercutio. 

earlier    than    any    recorded    in    New  6.   her  inaid\  A  votary  of  the  virgin 

Eng.    Diet.       Certain    coarse    words  Diana. 

are     called     "field-bed    words"     by  8.   sick  and  green~\  Collier  pleads  for 

Massinger,  Old  Law,  iv.  ii.  (meaning  his  "  old  corrector's  "  white  and  green 

speech  of  the  camp  ?).  on    the    ground    that  these  were    the 

colours    of    the    fool's    livery    under 

Scenc  //  Henry    vin.        Probably    the     word 
green-sickness  suggested  the  epithets. 

Romeo    advances]    I    indicate    by  See  in.  v.   156. 

these  words  that   Romeo  has  not  left  10.    //    is}    Grant    White    supposes 

the  stage.      He  overhears  Mercutio's  that  at  this  point  Juliet  steps  out  upon 

words,   and  his    opening  line  rhymes  the  balcony  ;  previously  only  the  light 

with  Benvolio's  last.       Grant  White  from  her  window  was  visible. 


ROMEO   AND   JULIET  53 

O,  that  she  knew  she  were  ! — 

She  speaks,  yet  she  says  nothing  :  what  of  that  ? 

Her  eye  discourses;   I  will  answer  it. — 

I  am  too  bold,  'tis  not  to  me  she  speaks : 

Two  of  the  fairest  stars  in  all  the  heaven,  i  5 

Having  some  business,  do  entreat  her  eyes 

To  twinkle  in  their  spheres  till  they  return. 

What  if  her  eyes  were  there,  they  in  her  head  ? 

The  brightness  of   her  cheek  would  shame    those 

stars 

As  daylight  doth  a  lamp;  her  eyes  in  heaven        20 
Would  through  the  airy  region  stream  so  bright 
That  birds  would  sing  and  think  it  were  not  night. — 
See,  how  she  leans  her  cheek  upon  her  hand  ! 
O,  that  I  were  a  glove  upon  that  hand, 
That  I  might  touch  that  cheek  ! 

Jul.  Ay  me ! 

Rom.  She  speaks  :      2  5 

O,  speak  again,  bright  angel !   for  thou  art 
As  glorious  to  this  night,  being  o'er  my  head, 
As  is  a  winged  messenger  of  heaven 
Unto  the  white-upturned  wondering  eyes 
Of  mortals,  that  fall  back  to  gaze  on  him  30 

When  he  bestrides  the  lazy-pacing  clouds 
And  sails  upon  the  bosom  of  the  air. 

Jnl.    O  Romeo,  Romeo  !   wherefore  art  thou  Romeo  ? 


21.  region^  strictly  a  division  of 
the  sky;  see  note  on  Haw  let,  II.  ii. 
518  (ed.  Dowden). 

27.  nigAf]  Theobald,    followed  l>y 


54  ROMEO    AND   JULIET          [ACT  n. 

Deny  thy  father  and  refuse  thy  name ; 

Or,  if  thou  wilt  not,  be  but  sworn  my  love,  3  5 

And  I  '11  no  longer  be  a  Capulet. 

Rom,  \_Aside.~\   Shall    I   hear  more,  or  shall    I    speak    at 
this  ? 

Jul.  'Tis  but  thy  name  that  is  my  enemy ; 

Thou  art  thyself,  though  not  a  Alontague. 

What 's  Montague  ?   it  is  nor  hand,  nor  foot,          40 

Nor  arm,  nor  face,  nor  any  other  part 

Belonging  to  a  man.      O,  be  some  other  name  ! — 

What 's  in  a  name  ?   that  which  we  call  a  rose 

By  any  other  name  would  smell  as  sweet  ; 

So  Romeo  would,  were  he  not  Romeo  call'd,         45 

Retain  that  dear  perfection  which  he  owes 

Without  that  title. — Romeo,  doff  thy  name, 

And  for  thy  name,  which  is  no  part  of  thee, 

Take  all  myself. 

Rom.  I  take  thee  at  thy  word  : 

Call  me  but  love,  and  I  '11  be  new  baptized  ;  50 

Henceforth  I  never  will  be  Romeo. 

Jul.   What  man  art  thou,  that,  thus  bescreen'd  in  night, 
So  stumblest  on  my  counsel  ? 

41,  42.  Nor  arm  .  .  .  name}  Malone  ;  O  i  has  41,  omits  42;  The  rest 
Nor  anne  nor  face,  6  be  some  other  name  Belonging  to  a  man.  44.  namc\ 
Q  I  ;  -word  O,  F.  47.  title. — Roinco~\  tytle,  l\omeo  Q,  title  Romeo,  F  ; 
doff}  Q,  F  ;  part  O  i.  48.  thy}  Q,  F  ;  that  Q  i. 

39.    Thou    .    .    .    Montague}    Dyce  47.   doff}    Daniel    pleads    for    Q    I 

has      followed      Maione's      unhappy  par!,     as     characteristically     playing 

punctuation,      "Thou      art       thyself  with  the  word  part  of  next  line,      lie 

though,     not."       The     meaning      is  compares   Sonnet  cxiii.  :   "Doth/w/ 

obviously:     What's    in  a  name?     If  his  function  and  is  partly  blind/1 

you  refuse  the  name   Montague,  you  49.   /  .    .   .   ivord}  Ought  \ve  not  to 

remain  yourself.  pause  after  thee,  making  /  take  thee  a 

46.  owes]  possesses,  as  in   Lear,   I.  response  to  Take  all  myself  ? 
i.  205. 


sc.  ii.]  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  55 

Rom.  By  a  name 

I  know  not  how  to  tell  thcc  who  I  am  : 
My  name,  dear  saint,  is  hateful  to  myself,  5  5 

Because  it  is  an  enemy  to  thee  : 
Had  I  it  written,  I  would  tear  the  word. 

Jul.   My  ears  have  yet  not  drunk  a  hundred  words 

Of  thy  tongue's  uttering,  yet  I  know  the  sound  : 
Art  thou  not  Romeo,  and  a  Montague  ?  60 

Rom.  Neither,  fair  maid,  if  either  thee  dislike. 

Jul,   How  cam'st  thou  hither,  tell  me,  and  wherefore  ? 
The  orchard  walls  are  high  and  hard  to  climb, 
And  the  place  death,  considering  who  thou  art, 
If  any  of  my  kinsmen  find  thee  here.  65 

Rom.   With    love's    light    wings    did    I    o'er-pcrch   these 

walls, 

For  stony  limits  cannot  hold   love  out, 
And  what  love  can  do  that  dares  love  attempt ; 
Therefore  thy  kinsmen  are  no  stop  to  me. 

Jul.   If  they  do  see  thee,  they  will  murder  thee.  70 

Row.   Alack,  there  lies  more  peril  in  thine  eye 

Than     twenty    of    their    swords :     look    thou     but 

sweet, 
And  I  am  proof  against  their  enmity. 

58.  yd  not}  O,  F  ;  not  yd  O  I.          59.   thy  .   .    .   uttering  O,  F  ;  that  .  .  . 
utterance  O  i,  Malone.          61.    maid  .   .  .  u'isli/^}  O,  F;  saint  .  .  .  displease 
O  i.         69.   stop]  Q,  F  ;  let  Q  i. 

55.   saint]    recalling     their    recent  Edward  III.  (15961,  n.   i.   2:    "His 

meeting,    I.    v.     102.      II.    Coleridge  ear    to    drink    her     sweet     tongue  .i 

compares  Drayton,  England's  He roic-  utterance.'' 

all  Epistles,  Henry  to  Rosamund:  61.  dislike]  displease,  as  in  Othello, 

"  If 't  be  my  name  that  doth  thee  so  II.  iii.  49. 

offend,  62.   lukti-tforc]  accented  as  here  in 

I\'o  more  myself  shall   be  my  own  M:dsttviniir   Nighfs   Drdirn,    ill.    ii. 

name's  friend.''  272    (Kolfe).       See    \Valker,     Shake- 

59.  uttering]       Malune      compares  s/ care's    Versification,   p.    ill. 


56  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACTH. 

JuL   I  would  not  for  the  world  they  saw  thee  here. 

Rom.   I    have   night's    cloak    to     hide     me    from     their 
eyes  ;  7  5 

And  but  thou  love  me,  let  them  find  me  here : 
My  life  were  better  ended  by  their  hate, 
Than  death  prorogued,  wanting  of  thy  love. 

Jul.   By  whose  direction  found'st  thou  out  this  place  ? 

Rom.   By  love,  that  first  did  prompt  me  to  inquire  ;       80 
He  lent  me  counsel,  and  I  lent  him  eyes. 
I  am  no  pilot ;  yet,  wert  thou  as  far 
As  that  vast  shore  wash'd  with  the  farthest  sea, 
I  would  adventure  for  such  merchandise. 

JuL  Thou  know'st  the  mask  of  night  is  on  my  face,      8  5 
Else  would  a  maiden  blush  bepaint  my  cheek 
For  that  which  thou  hast  heard  me  speak  to-night. 
Fain  would  I  dwell  on  form,  fain,  fain  deny 
What  I  have  spoke  :  but  farewell  compliment ! 
Dost    thou    love    me  ?      I     know     thou     wilt     say 
"  Ay,"  90 

And  I  will  take  thy  word  ;  yet,  if  thou  swear'st, 
Thou  mayst  prove  false  ;   at  lovers'  perjuries, 

75-  eyes]  Q,  F  ;  sight  Q  I.  So.  that}  Q,  F  ;  ivho  O  I.  83.  vast  shore 
•washed]  Qq  4,  5  ;  vast  shore  -ujasheth  Q  ;  vasi-shore-washct  F  ;  farthest} 
Q,  F  -/furthest  Q  I.  84.  would}  Q  I  :  should  Q,  Y.  89.  compliment} 
Pope ;  complement  Q,  F ;  complements  Q  I,  F  2.  90.  love  me  '!  1}  Q ;  Love  ' 
I  F  ;  Love  ?  O  I  Ff  2,  3. 

78.  prorogued]  delayed,  as  in  IV.  i.  to  a  commercial  enterprise  across 

48.  the  sea.  The  society  of  Merchant 

So.  By  love]  Keighlley  reads  By  Adventurers  was  so  named  by  Henry 

Love's.  vii. 

83.  vast]  Walker  (Crit.    Exam,  of        85.    mask~\  like  saint,   line   55,  per- 
Shakcspeare  s    7'e.vt,    ii.     39)    has    an  haps  a  reverberation  from  the  recent 
article  which  attempts    to    show  that  feast  ami  dance. 

Shakespeare  uses  the  word  like  Lat.  88.  dwell  on  form'}  adhere  to  con- 

vastus,  empty,  waste.  ventional  manners. 

84.  adventure'}    There  is  a    special  89.    compliment}     outward     forms, 
propriety  in  the  \vord  when  referring  punctilio,  as  in  Much  Ado,  IV.  i.  322- 


sc.ii.]          ROMEO   AND   JULIET  57 

They  say,  Jove  laughs.      O  gentle  Romeo, 

If  thou  dost  love,  pronounce  it  faithfully  ; 

Or  if  thou  think'st  I  am  too  quickly  won,  95 

I  '11  frown  and  be  perverse  and  say  thee  nay, 

So  thou  wilt  woo  ;   but  else,  not  for  the  world. 

In  truth,  fair  Montague,  I  am  too  fond  ; 

And     therefore     thou     mayst     think     my     haviour 

light : 

But  trust  me,  gentleman,  I  '11  prove  more  true      100 
Than  those  that  have  more  cunning  to  be  strange. 
I  should  have  been  more  strange,  I  must  confess, 
But  that  thou  overheard'st,  ere  I  was  ware, 
My  true  love's  passion  :   therefore  pardon  me, 
And  not  impute  this  yielding  to  light  love,  105 

Which  the  dark  night  hath  so  discovered. 

Rom.   Lady,  by  yonder  blessed  moon  I  swear, 

That  tips  with  silver  all  these  fruit-tree  tops — 

Jul.   O,  swear  not  by  the  moon,  the  inconstant  moon, 

That  monthly  changes  in  her  circled  orb,  I  10 

93.  laughs]  Q,  taught  F.  95.  thou  think' st]  Q,  F;  thou  think  O  I. 
99.  haviour~\  Q  i,  F  2  ;  behaviour  Q,  F.  101.  more  cunning]  Q  I  ;  coy  ing 
O,  F;  more  coyingty\^  5.  104.  true  love's]  true  loves  O  i,  F;  truelovc 
n.  107.  blessed]  O  i,  Q;  omitted  F;  wear']  O  i  ;  z-ow  Q,  F.  108. 
tops — ]  Rowe  ;  tops.  Q,  F.  1 10.  circled]  F,  circle  (). 

93.  Jove      laughs]     Douce  :      This  106.    Which]    refers    to    yielding; 

Shakespeare  found    in  Ovid's  Art  of  discovered,  revealed. 

Love — -perhaps    in    Marlowe's    trans-  107.  swear]    Walker :     "F     omits 

lation,  B.  i.  :  "  For  Jove  himself  sits  in  blessed  and  has  vow  for  swear.     Can 

the  azure  skies,  And  laughs  below  at  this  have  originated  in  the  Profanation 

lovers'1  perjuries.''     Greene  has  it  also  Act?" 

in  his  Metamorphosis.  109.  moon]  Of  many  parallels  which 

100.  gentleman]    Rushton,    Shake-  might  he  quoted  that  cited  by  Hunter 
speare's  Euphuism,  p.    56,  illustrates  from  Wilson's  Rhetorique  (Arnplifica- 
from  Lyly  this  mode  of  address,  and  tion )  may  suffice  :    "as  .   .    .   in  speak- 
cites  parallels  for  parts  of  this  speech,  ing  of  inconstancy  to  shew  the  moon 

101.  strange]  reserved,    as    in    in.  which  keepeth  no  certain  course." 
ii.  15. 


58  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACTH. 

Lest  that  thy  love  prove  likewise  variable. 
Rom.  What  shall  I  swear  by  ? 
Jul.  Do  not  swear  at  all ; 

Or,  if  thou  wilt,  swear  by  thy  gracious  self, 

Which  is  the  god  of  my  idolatry, 

And  I  '11  believe  thee. 

Rom.  If  my  heart's  dear  love —      I  I  5 

Jul.  Well,  do  not  swear.      Although  I  joy  in  thee, 

I  have  no  joy  of  this  contract  to-night ; 

It  is  too  rash,  too  unadvised,  too  sudden, 

Too  like  the  lightning,  which  doth  cease  to  be 

Ere     one     can     say    "It    lightens."      Sweet,     good 
night !  I  20 

This  bud  of  love,  by  summer's  ripening  breath, 

May  prove  a  beauteous  flower  when  next  we  meet. 

Good  night,  good  night !   as  sweet  repose  and  rest 

Come  to  thy  heart  as  that  within  my.  breast ! 
Rom.   O,  wilt  thou  leave  me  so  unsatisfied  ?  125 

Jul.  What  satisfaction  canst  thou  have  to-night  ? 
Rom.  The  exchange  of  thy  love's  faithful  vow  for  mine. 
Jul.   I  gave  thee  mine  before  thou  didst  request  it ; 

And  yet  I  would  it  were  to  give  again. 
Rom.  Wouldst    thou    withdraw    it  ?     for    what    purpose, 
love?  130 

Jul.   But  to  be  frank,  and  give  it  thee  again. 


contract'}  Kolfo  :  "Accented  bv 


Shakespeare  on   either  syllable  . 


The  verb  alwas  on  the  second." 


120.    "  It  lightens  "]  Stecvens  com- 


pares  Midsummer  Kighfs  Drea 


145-148,  and  cites  a  parallel  from 
Drayton,  The  Miracle  of  Moses. 

124.  as  that\  Delius  explains  :  "as 
to  that  Iicart  within  my  breast." 

131.  frank']  bountiful,  as  in  Sennits, 
iv.  4. 


sc.  ii.]  ROMEO    AND   JULIET  59 

And  yet  I  wish  but  for  the  thing  I  have  : 
My  bounty  is  as  boundless  as  the  sea, 
My  love  as  deep  ;  the  more  I  give  to  thee, 
The  more  I  have,  for  both  are  infinite.  I  35 

[Nurse  calls  ivithin. 

I  hear  some  noise  within  ;  dear  love,  adieu  ! — 
Anon,  good  nurse  ! — Sweet  Montague,  be  true. 
Stay  but  a  little,  I  will  come  again.  \Exit. 

Ron.   O  blessed  blessed  night !    I  am  afeard, 

Being  in  night,  all  this  is  but  a  dream,  I  40 

Too  flattering-sweet  to  be  substantial. 

Re-enter  JULIKT,  above. 

Jul.  Three  words,  dear  Romeo,  and  good  night  indeed. 
If  that  thy  bent  of  love  be  honourable, 
Thy  purpose  marriage,  send  me  word  to-morrow, 
By  one  that  I  '11  procure  to  come  to  thee,  145 

Where  and  what  time  thou  wilt  perform  the  rite, 
And  all  my  fortunes  at  thy  foot  I  '11  lay, 
And  follow  thee  my  lord  throughout  the  world. 

Nurse.  [  Within.}   Madam  ! 

Jul.   I  come,  anon. — But  if  thou  mean'st  not  well,        150 
I  do  beseech  thee — 

Nurse.  [  Within.}  Madam  ! 

Jul.  By  and  by,  I  come  : — 

138.  Exit]  Rowe  ;  omitted  O,  !•".  141.  flattering-sweet]  hyphen  Then- 
bald.  141.  Re-enter.  .  .]  Rowe  ;  omitted  Q,  F  ;  Enter  F  2.  146.  ritt  \ 
F  3  ;  riyit  O,  K  :  rights  Q  4  :  rites  O  5.  148.  lord'}  O  I,  F  ;  L.  O  :  Lore 
(v)(|  4,  5.  140,  151.  Nurse  [WithinJ  Capell,  omitted  O  (Madam  in  margin), 

Within:   F. 

132.  Ana  yd'}  The  meaning  is  given  of  this  speech  is  irom  Brooke's 
in  lines  134.  135.  poem. 

143!  honourable'}     The    suggestion          151.   By  and  by'}  immediately.   Nfiv 


60  ROMEO   AND  JULIET         [ACTH. 

To  cease  thy  suit,  and  leave  me  to  my  grief: 
To-morrow  will  I  send. 

Rom.  So  thrive  my  soul, — 

Jul.   A  thousand  times  good  night !  \Exit. 

Rom.  A     thousand     times     the     worse,     to     want     thy 

light.  i  5  5 

Love  goes  toward   love,  as  school-boys  from  their 

books, 

But  love  from  love,  toward  school  with  heavy  looks. 

[Retiring  slowly. 

Re-enter  JULIET,  above. 

Jul.   Hist !   Romeo,  hist ! — O,  for  a  falconer's  voice, 
To  lure  this  tassel-gentle  back  again  ! 
Bondage  is  hoarse,  and  may  not  speak  aloud  ;     i  60 
Else  would  I  tear  the  cave  where  Echo  lies, 

152.  suit]  Qq  4,  5  ;  strife  Q,  F.  153.  soul, — ]  Theobald  ;  soule.  Q,  F. 
154.  Exit]  F,  omitted  Q.  155.  light}  Q,  F  ;  sight  Qq  4,  5.  157.  toward} 
Q,  towards  F.  159.  tassel-gentle}  Hanmer  ;  Tassel  gentle  Q,  F.  160. 
sfeak}  Q,  F;  crie  Q  i. 

Eng.  Diet,  quotes  Cogan,  Haven  of  peregrine — being  distinguished  by  the 

Health:     "111    seeds  .   .   .   shew    not  addition  of  the  word  'gentle.'    There 

themselves  by  and  by,  but  yet  in  pro-  was  thus  a  subtle  tribute  paid  by  Juliet 

cesse  of  time  they  bud  forth."  to    her    lover's    nobility   of    nature." 

152.   suit}  The  reading  suit  is  con-  Minsheu,  Guide  into  the  Tongues,  gives 

firmed  by  the  occurrence  of  "  to  cease  rapel  •&.<-,  a  synonym  for  lure  for  a  hawk, 

your  suit  "  in  the  corresponding  pas-  from  Fr.  "  Rapeler,  i.,  reappellare,  i., 

sage  of  Brooke's  poem.  to  repeale  or  call  backc. "     In  Mabbe's 

157.   toward  school}  Rolfe  compares  translation  of  Gasman  dc  Alfarache. 

As  You  Like  It,  n.  vii.  145 — Jaques"  1623  (quoted  by  Rolfc),  tassel-gentles, 

"  whining  schoolboy."  used   metaphorically,   is  explained  in 

159.  lure  this  tassel-gentle}  Madden,  the  margin  as   "  Kinde  Lovers."     In 

Diary  of  Master  William  Silence,  p.  Massinger's    The   Guardian,  I.  i.,  the 

157:     "The    males    of     the    hawks  tiercel   gentle    is    named   as   the   bird 

principally    used    in     falconry  —  the  "  for  an  evening  flight." 

peregrine  and  goshawk — were  called  160.   hoarse"}  Daniel  reads  hiisht.  and 

'tiercels'   or   'tercels'    [corrupted   to  in  line   162  for  mine  he  reads  l-'amc 

tassels},   because  (it  is  said)  they  are  (rhyming  with  name}. 

smaller  than  the  females  by  one  third  ;  161.   tear  .   .   .   cave}  Milton's    ear 

the  male  of  the  nobler  species — the  perhaps  was  haunted  by  this  passage  ; 


sc.  n.]  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  61 

And  make  her  airy  tongue  more  hoarse  than  mine, 
With  repetition  of  my  Romeo's  name. 

Rom.   It  is  my  soul  that  calls  upon  my  name : 

How    silver  -  sweet      sound      lovers'      tongues     by 
night,  165 

Like  softest  music  to  attending  ears  ! 

Jnl.   Romeo  ! 

Rom.  My  dear  ? 

Jul.  At  what  o'clock  to-morrow 

Shall  I  send  to  thee  ? 

Rom.  By  the  hour  of  nine. 

Jnl.   I  will  not  fail ;  'tis  twenty  years  till  then. 

I  have  forgot  why  I  did  call  thee  back.  170 

Rom.  Let  me  stand  here  till  thou  remember  it. 

Jul.   I  shall  forget,  to  have  thee  still  stand  there, 
Remembering  how  I  love  thy  company. 

Rom.  And  I  '11  still  stay,  to  have  thee  still  forget, 

Forgetting  any  other  home  but  this.  i  7  5 

Jul.  'Tis  almost  morning  ;   I  would  have  thee  gone  ; 
And  yet  no  further  than  a  wanton's  bird, 
Who  lets  it  hop  a  little  from  her  hand, 
Like  a  poor  prisoner  in  his  twisted  gyves, 
And  with  a  silk  thread  plucks  it  back  again,       I  80 

162.   tongue}    Q,    F;   voice  Q   I.  162,    163.    than  mine,    With~\    Q   5; 

then  inyne  With  O  4  ;  then  IVilh  Q,  F.  163.  Romeo 's  name}  Q  I  ;  Romeo 
Q,  F.  163,  164.]  Cambridge  editors  insert  Romeo!  (from  Q  i)  between 
these  lines.  164.  son!}  O,  F;  love,  OJq  4,  5.  167.  My  dcar?~\  Qq  4,  5 
(without?);  Madame  (^  i;  My  ATeete  Q,  F;  My  sweet,  Ff  2-4  and  many 
editors  ;  At  what]  Q  I  ;  What  Q,  F.  168.  By~\  Q,  F  ;  At  Q  I  and  several 
editors.  169.  years}  F,  yeare  Q.  172.  forget,  to}  (Jq  3,  4,  F  ;  forget  to 
Q  and  several  editors.  i-jj.  further}  Y,  farther  Q.  178.  ll'ho  .  .  .  her} 
O  i;  That  .  .  .  his  Q,  F.  180.  si!/;  .  .  .  again}  Pope;  so  Q  I,  reading 
fills  ioi  f  lucks  ;  O,  F  have  silken  and  plucks,  and  bo  Ff  2-4,  omitting  back. 

in  Par.  Lost,  15.  i.  542,  we  have  <  208,  "  airy  tongues  that  syllable  men's 
"  tore  hell's  concave,"  and  in  Cottius, "?  names/3 


62  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACTH. 

So  loving-jealous  of  his  liberty. 
Rom.   I  would  I  were  thy  bird. 
Jill.  Sweet,  so  would  I  : 

Yet  I  should  kill  thee  with  much  cherishing. 

Good    night,    good    night  !     parting    is    such    sweet 
sorrow 

That  I  shall  say  good  night  till  it  be  morrow.     185 

{Exit. 
Rom.  Sleep  dwell  upon  thine  eyes,  peace  in  thy  breast ! 

Would  I  were  sleep  and  peace,  so  sweet  to  rest ! 

Hence  will  I  to  my  ghostly  father's  cell, 

His  help  to  crave,  and  my  dear  hap  to  tell.      \_Exit. 

SCENE  III. —  The  Same.     Friar  Laurence's  Cell. 

Enter  Friar  LAURENCE,  -with  a  basket. 

Fri.  The  grey-eyed  morn  smiles  on  the  frowning  night, 
Chequering    the     eastern     clouds    with    streaks    of 
light ; 

181.  loving-jealous]  hyphen  Theobald.  185.  Exit]  Pope  ;  omitted  Q, 
F  ;  after  line  1 86  Ff  2-4.  1 88.  father's  cell}  Q  I  ;  Friers  close  cell  Qq, 
Ff  3,  4  ;  Fries  close  cell  Ff  I,  2.  189.  dear']  Q,  F  ;  i^ood  Q  I. 

Scene  nr. 

Friar  Laurence's  Cell]  Malone  ;  A  Monastery  Rowc  ;  Fields  near  a 
Convent  Capell.  Enter  .  .  .  ]  Ro\ve  ;  Enter  Frier  alone  with  a  basket 
(),  F  ;  Enter  Frier  Francis  O  I. 

184.     Good     night}      Cambridge:  Scene  ill. 

"  This  passage  was  printed  substanti-          1-4.    The  .   .   .   wheels']  Attempting 

ally  right  in  Q  i.     The  O  2  inserted  to  remedy  the  confusion  recorded  in 

after  the  first  line  of  Romeo's  speech  the  last  note,  Ff  2-4  omit  these  lines 

the  first  four  of  the  Friar's,  repeating  here,  leaving  them  in  our  Scene  ii. 
them  in  their  proper  place."     Further          I.    grey-eyed~\     Tourneur    in    The 

corruption    in   Q    3;    intruding    lines  Atheisfs  Tragedie,  I.  iii..  has:   "The 

ejected,     and     speeches     distributed  gray  eie'd  Morning  makes  the  fairest 

aright  in  Oq   4,    5  ;    F  follows  Q  3  ;  day."       Grey    may    mean    what    we 

"  Pope    restored    the    true    arrange-  understand    by   the    word,    or    bluish 

menu"        For     further     details,     see  grey.      See  a  fuller  note  on  the  word 

Camb.  ed.  as  it  occurs  in  II.  iv.  47. 


sc.  in.]          KOMEO    AND   JULIET  63 

And  flecked  darkness  like  a  drunkard  reels 

From  forth  day's  path  and  Titan's  fiery  wheels  : 

Now,  ere  the  sun  advance  his  burning  eye  5 

The  day  to  cheer  and  night's  dank  dew  to  dry, 

I  must  up-fill  this  osier  cage  of  ours 

With  baleful  weeds  and  precious-juiced  flowers. 

The  earth  that's  nature's  mother  is  her  tomb; 

What  is  her  burying  grave,  that  is  her  womb,        10 

And  from  her  womb  children  of  divers  kind 

We  sucking  on  her  natural  bosom  find, 

Many  for  many  virtues  excellent, 

None  but  for  some,  and  yet  all  different. 

O,  mickle  is  the  powerful  grace  that  lies  I  5 

In  herbs,  plants,  stones,  and  their  true  qualities  : 

For  nought  so  vile  that  on  the  earth  doth  live 

But  to  the  earth  some  special  good  doth  give  ; 

Nor  aught  so  good  but,  strain'd  from  that  fair  use, 

Revolts  from  true  birth,  stumbling  on  abuse:         20 

3.  flecked]  Q  I,  flcckdd  Q,  flcckkd  F.          4.  fiery]  O   i  ;  burning,  O,  F. 
$.  precious-juiced]  hyphen  Pope.          16.   herbs,  plants]  Ql  \  Plants,  hearbes 
<.,),  F.          2O.  front  .   .   .  stumbling}  O,  F;  to  vice,  and  stumbles  <<)  I. 

T>.  flecked]  dappled  (not  obsolete),  sleeping-potion  in  iv.     "Osier  cage 

^\\afleckled  of  F  implies  little  streaks  of  ours"  possibly  not  merely  for  the 

or  spots  (diminutive_//tY/('/(').    Compare  rhyme's  sake,  hut  because  the  Fran- 

Much  Ado,  v.  iii.  27.  ciscan  had  no  personal  property. 

4.  From  .   .    .    wheels]    Pope    read  9.   her    tomli]    Steevens    compares 
with  Q  in  the  lines  erroneously  printed  Lucretius    (v.    259):     "  Omniparens 
at  the  close  of  Scene  ii.,  and,  with  Ff  eadem  rerum  conmune  sepulchrum," 
2-4  here,  path-way,  made  by.  and  Milton,  Par.  Lost,  ii.  911:   "  The 

5.  advance]  lift  up,  as  (of  eyelids)  womb    of    nature    and    perhaps    her 
in  Tempest,  I.  ii.  408.  grave."       Malone    adds   I'eric/es,    II, 

7.   osier  cage]  Steevens  quotes  Dray-  iii.  45,  46. 

ton's  description,   in  Polyolbion,  xiii.,          15.   mick!e]    Fxcept    in    Henry    J'. 

of  a  hermit  filling  his  osier  inaund  or  (Pistol    speaking)     this    word    occurs 

basket    with    simples.       Shakespeare  only  in  Shakespeare's  earlv  plays, 
had   the   suggestion    for   this   passage          18.   /j]    Hanmer    reads   to^t,    mak- 

from   Brooke's  poem;   it  prepares  us  ing  earth  the  giver.      Malone  explains 

for  the  friar's  skill   in  furnishing  the  earth  as  inhabitants  of  the  earth. 


64  ROMEO    AND   JULIET          [ACT  H. 

Virtue  itself  turns  vice,  being  misapplied, 
And  vice  sometime  's  by  action  dignified. 
Within  the  infant  rind  of  this  weak  flower 
Poison  hath  residence  and  medicine  power : 
For  this,  being  smelt,  with  that  part  cheers  each 
part ;  2  5 

Being  tasted,  slays  all  senses  with  the  heart. 
Two  such  opposed  kings  encamp  them  still 
In  man  as  well  as  herbs,  grace  and  rude  will ; 
And  where  the  worser  is  predominant, 
Full  soon  the  canker  death  eats  up  that  plant.      30 

Enter  ROMEO. 

Rom.  Good  morrow,  father. 

Fri.  Benedicite ! 

What  early  tongue  so  sweet  saluteth  me  ? 

Young  son,  it  argues  a  distemper'd  head 

So  soon  to  bid  good  morrow  to  thy  bed  : 

Care  keeps  his  watch  in  every  old  man's  eye,        3  5 

22.  sometime  's]  Capell ;  sometimes  Q  I  ;  sometime  Q,  F.         23.  weak]  Q, 
F  ;  small  O  i  and  many  editors.         26.  slays'}  F,  states  Q  (alone).         27.  kings'] 
Q,  F  ;  foes,  Q  I.         30.  Enter  Romeo]  Pope  ;  after  line  22  Q,  F.         32.  sweet'} 
O,  F  ;  soon  O  I. 

23.  weak}  A  gain  on  small  Q  I,  as  27.   kings]      Rowe      reads     kinds. 
opposed  to  power,  line  24.  Ma.lonecompa.resALover'sComflaznf, 

24.  medicine}    Warburton    conjee-  202,  203 : 

tured    medic nal,    and    Capell    medi-  "  Effects  of  terror  and  dear  modesty, 

tine's.  Encamp \l  in  hearts,  but  fighting 

25.  that  part]    the    odorous    part  ;  outwardly." 

or,  as  Malone  explains,    "the   olfac-  30.   canker]  the  canker-worm,  as  in 

lory  nerves,"  with  meaning   together  Midsummer  Night  s  Dream,  II.  ii.  3; 

with.     The  comma  after  smelt  is  in  and  Venus  and  Adonis,  line  656. 

F  ;  absent  from  Q,  which  has  a  comma  34.  good  morrow]  Here  a   parting 

after  part.  good  morrow. 

26.  slays]     Mommsen    accepts     O  35.   watch]  waking,  as  in  Hamlet, 
stays,  in  the  sense  "  brings  to  a  stand-  n.  ii.  148. 

still." 


sc.  HI.]         HOMEO   AND   JULIET  Go 

And  where  care  lodges,  sleep  will  never  lie ; 

But  where  unbruised  youth  with  unstuff'd  brain 

Doth  couch  his  limbs,  there  golden  sleep  doth  reign  : 

Therefore  thy  earliness  doth  me  assure 

Thou  art  up-roused  by  some  distemperature  ;        40 

Or  if  not  so,  then  here  I  hit  it  right, 

Our  Romeo  hath  not  been  in  bed  to-night. 

Rom.   That  last  is  true  ;   the  sweeter  rest  was  mine. 

Fri.   God  pardon  sin  !   wast  thou  with  Rosaline? 

Rom.  With  Rosaline,  my  ghostly  father?   no;  45 

I  have  forgot  that  name,  and  that  name's  woe. 

Fri.   That 's   my   good   son  :   but   where   hast   thou   been, 
then  ? 

Rom.   I  '11  tell  thee,  ere  thou  ask  it  me  again. 
I  have  been  feasting  with  mine  enemy, 
Where  on  a  sudden  one  hath  wounded  me,  50 

That 's  by  me  wounded  :   both  our  remedies 
Within  thy  help  and  holy  physic  lies  : 
I  bear  no  hatred,  blessed  man  ;   for,  lo, 
My  intercession  likewise  steads  my  foe. 

Fri.   Be  plain,  good  son,  and  homely  in  thy  drift ;          5  5 
Riddling  confession  finds  but  riddling  shrift. 

Rom.   Then  plainly  know  my  heart's  dear  love  is  set 
On  the  fair  daughter  of  rich  Capulet: 
As  mine  on  hers,  so  hers  is  set  on  mine ; 
And  all  combined,  save  what  thou  must  combine      60 

40,   by]  Q  i;  -vit/i  Q,  F.          55.   and]  O,  rest  F. 

37.   unbruised]    Collier    (MS.)    has  of  us  both;  so  "  both  our  mothers," 

unbusied.  the  mother  of  us  both,   All's  H'd//,  I. 

40.  di$temperature\  disturbance  of  iii.  169. 
mind,  or  of  body.  54.   steads]  benefits,    as   frequently 

51.  both  our  remedies}  the  remedy  in  Shakespeare. 


66  KOMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACTH. 

By  holy  marriage :  when,  and  where,  and  how, 
We  met,  we  woo'd  and  made  exchange  of  vow, 
I  '11  tell  thee  as  we  pass  ;  but  this  I  pray, 
That  thou  consent  to  marry  us  to-day. 
Fri.   Holy  Saint  Francis,  what  a  change  is  here!          65 
Is  Rosaline,  whom  thou  didst  love  so  dear, 
So  soon  forsaken  ?  young  men's  love  then  lies 
Not  truly  in  their  hearts,  but  in  their  eyes. 
Jesu  Maria,  what  a  deal  of  brine 
Hath  wash'd  thy  sallow  cheeks  for  Rosaline !        70 
How  much  salt  water  thrown  away  in  waste, 
To  season  love,  that  of  it  doth  not  taste  ! 
The  sun  not  yet  thy  sighs  from  heaven  clears, 
Thy  old  groans  ring  yet  in  mine  ancient  ears ; 
Lo,  here  upon  thy  cheek  the  stain  doth  sit  75 

Of  an  old  tear  that  is  not  wash'd  off  yet. 
If  e'er  thou  wast  thyself  and  these  woes  thine, 
Thou  and  these  woes  were  all  for  Rosaline  : 
And    art  thou    changed  ?    pronounce    this   sentence 

then  : 

Women    may    fall,    when    there 's    no    strength    in 
men.  80 

Rom.  Thou  chidd'st  me  oft  for  loving  Rosaline. 

Fri.   For  doting,  not  for  loving,  pupil  mine. 

Rom.   And  bad'st  me  bury  love. 

Fri.  Not  in  a  grave 

To  lay  one  in,  another  out  to  have. 

66.   ivho»i\  O  i;  that  O,  F.          74.  ring  ycf\  O   i;  yet  ringing  Q,  V 
ri>i^' (^<.[  4,  5,  Ff 2-4  ;  mine\  Q  ;  my  Q  I,  F. 

72.  season]  give  a  relish  to.  Com- 
pare All's  Well.  I.  i.  55:  " 'Tis  the 
best  brine  a  maiden  can  'season  her 


sc.  iv.]          ROMEO   AND   JULIET  67 

Rom.   I  pray  thce,  chide  not :  she  whom  I  love  now      8  5 
Uoth  grace  for  grace  and  love  for  love  allow  ; 
The  other  did  not  so. 

Fri.  O,  she  knew  well 

Thy  love  did  read  by  rote  that  could  not  spell. 

But  come,  young  waverer,  come,  go  with  me, 

In  one  respect  I  '11  thy  assistant  be;  90 

For  this  alliance  may  so  happy  prove, 

To  turn  your  households'  rancour  to  pure  love. 

Rom.   O,  let  us  hence;    I  stand  on  sudden  haste. 

Fri.  Wisely  and  slow  ;  they  stumble  that  run  fast. 

\Exeunt, 

SCENE  IV. — The  Same.     A  Street. 

Enter  BENYOLIO  and  MERCUTIO. 

Mer.  Where  the  devil  should  this  Romeo  be  ? 

Came  he  not  home  to-night? 
Ben.  Not  to  his  father's ;   I  spoke  with  his  man. 
Mer.  Why,    that    same    pale    hard-hearted    wench,   that 
Rosaline, 

Torments  him  so,  that  he  will  sure  run  mad.  5 

85.  chide  .  .  .  7]  O  i  ;  chide  me  not,  her  I  Q,  F.  88.  that}  O,  F;  and 
O  i  and  many  editors.  92.  households']  Capell,  hoitsholds  Q,  hoiishoitld  Y . 

Scene  ir. 

1-3.]  As  in  Steevens  ;  prose  Q,  F.  i.  \Vherc\  O,  F  ;  Why  where  Capell 
(getting  Why  from  Q  i).  4,  5.]  verse  ()  I,  Q  ;  prose  F.  4.  Why}  Q,  F  ; 
Ah  Q  i  and  many  editors. 

88.  read  by  rote'}  repeated  phrases  iv.  36;  "  who  stand  so  much  on  the 
learnt  by  heart,  but  had  no  intelli-  new  form." 

cence  of  the  beggarly  elements  of  true 

•  \rftif  us 

passion. 

93.  stand  on}  it  imports  me  much  2.  to-iii^ht}  last  night,  as  in  I.  iv. 
to  be  speedy  (Staunton).  So  n.  50. 


68  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACTH. 

Ben.  Tybalt,  the  kinsman  to  old  Capulet, 

Hath  sent  a  letter  to  his  father's  house. 

Mer.  A  challenge,  on  my  life. 

Ben.  Romeo  will  answer  it. 

Mer.  Any    man    that    can    write    may    answer     a      10 
letter. 

Ben.  Nay,  he  will  answer  the  letter's  master,  how  he 
dares,  being  dared. 

Mer.   Alas,  poor  Romeo,  he  is  already  dead  !  stabbed 

with  a  white  wench's  black  eye  ;  shot  thorough      i  5 
the  ear  with  a  love-song ;  the  very  pin  of  his 
heart  cleft  with  the  blind  bow-boy's  butt-shaft ; 
and  is  he  a  man  to  encounter  Tybalt  ? 

Ben.   Why,  what  is  Tybalt? 

Mer.   More  than  prince  of  cats,  I  can  tell  you.      O,      20 

6,  7.]  verse  Q  I  ;  prose  Q,  F.  6.  to]  Q,  F ;  of  Q  I.  15.  shot}  Q  I  ; 
run  Q,  F  and  several  editors  ;  thorough}  Q  I  ;  through  Q,  F.  19,  20. 
Why  .  .  .  0}  Capell  from  Q  i  ;  (),  F  omit  /  can  tell  you.  20.  prince} 
Q,  F;  the  prince  Q  I. 

12.  answer}    The    same    play    on  See  Love's  Labour's  Lost,  iv.  i.  138. 
answer  (by  letter  or  word)  and  answer,  So    Middleton,     No    IVit,    No   Help 
encounter  in  person,  occurs  in  Hamlet  like   a    Woman's,    II.    i.    27:    "And 
(see  note  on  v.  ii.  173,  ed.  Dowden).  I  '"11  cleave  the  black  pin  in  the  midst 

13.  dared}   challenged.     So    Lyly,  o'  the  white." 

Euphues    (ed.    Avber),    316:     "An  17.  butt-shaft}  an  unbarbed  arrow 

Englishman  .  .  .  [cannot]  suffer  .  .  .  used   for  shooting  at   butts.     "The 

to  be  dared  Y>y  any."  marks  to  shoot  at,"  says  G.  Markham 

14.  15.]    Daniel    conjectures   dead-  {Count ly  Contentments,   p.    108,  ed. 
stabbed,   and    argues    for   rim    Q,    F,  1616),  "are  three,  Buts,   Tricks,  and 
instead  of  shot.  Rovers."     The  Butt  is  a  level  mark, 

15.  ivhite     wench's]      White     may  and   therefore  would   have  an   arrow 
mean    only    pale-complexioned  ;    but  with  a  very  broad  feather.      So  Love's 
the   word   was  commonly  used   as  a  Lab.  Lost,  I.  ii.  181  :   "  Cupid's  butt- 
term    of    endearment    or    favour;    so  shaft  is  too  hard  for  Hercules' club." 
"white  boy"  of  a  favourite  son  ;  we  20.  prince   of  cats}    Tybert    is   the 
have     even     "his     white     villaine."  cat's    name     in    Reynard    the    Fox. 
See  Nares'  Glossary.  Steevens  quotes  Dekker,  Satiromastix, 

16.  pin}  Malone  :    "The    clout  or  "Tybert,    the    long-tailed    prince    of 
white  mark  at  which  the  arrows  [in  cats,"  and  Nash,  Have  with    Yon  to 
archery]   are   directed    was    fastened  Saffron  H'alden:  "not  Tibalt  prince 
by  a  black /z«  placed  in  the  center."  of  cats." 


SC.   IV.] 


ROMEO    AND   JULIET 


G9 


he  is  the  courageous  captain  of  compliments. 
Me  fights  as  you  sing  prick-song,  keeps  time, 
distance,  and  proportion  ;  rests  me  his  minim 
rest,  one,  two,  and  the  third  in  your  bosom  ; 
the  very  butcher  of  a  silk  button,  a  duellist,  a  25 
duellist ;  a  gentleman  of  the  very  first  house, 
of  the  first  and  second  cause.  Ah,  the  im- 
mortal passado  !  the  punto  reverso  !  the  hay  ! 

Ben.   The  what  ? 

Mer.   The    pox    of    such    antic,    lisping,    affecting      30 

21.  he  is]  Q  i  ;  //<''.<•  Q,  F.         23,  24.  rest.;  .  .   .   rest}  O  i,  Malone  ;  he 
rests,  his  minitin  rests  Q  ;  he  rests  his  ininnm,  V. 


21.  captain  of  compliments]  John- 
son :    "  master  of  the   laws  of  cere- 
mony."      Compare    Love's  Labours 
Lost,  i.  i.  169  : 

"A    man    of    complements,  whom 

right  and  wrong 

Have  chose  as  umpire    of   their 
mutiny." 

22.  priek-soiiff\  divisions  or  descant 
upon  a   Plain-song  or  Ground,   .   .    . 
written,    or  pricked    down,    in    con- 
tradistinction    to     those     performed 
extemporaneously    (drove,     Diet,    of 
Afusic).     Ascham,     Toxophilus     (ed. 
Arher,  p.  41):   "I  wysshe  .    .   .   that 
the  laudable  cvistome  of  Englande  to 
teache     chyldren     their     plainesonge 
and  priksong,  were  not  so  decayed.'' 

22,  23.  time,  distance,  and  propor- 
tion} Steevens  compares  lonson,A"zptvj' 
A  fan  in  his  Plninour,  \.  iv.  (Bobadil 
teaching  Matthew  to  fence):  "note 
your  distance,  keep  your  due  pro- 
portion of  time." 

25.  bntton\  Steevens  quotes  The 
Keturne  from  /'amassus  (p.  86,  cd. 
Macray)  :  ''Strikes  his  poinado  at  a 
l>ut tons  breadth."  Staunton  quotes 
Silver,  Paradoxes  of  Defence,  1509: 
"Signior  Rocca  .  .  .  thou  that 
takest  upon  thee  to  hit  anie  English- 
man with  a  thrust  upon  anie  button." 
So  Massinger,  Unnatural  Combat,  n. 


ii.  :    "He    can    teach    Our    modern 
duellists  how  to  cleave  a  button." 

26.  first    house}     may    mean    best 
family  ;  or,  in   a^  heraldic   sense,   the 
sons  of  the  original  ancestors  as  dis- 
tinguished   from    the    issue    of    those 
sons  (forming  "the  second  house"). 
In  Fletcher's  U'oman's  Prize,    IV.   i., 
"a    gentleman    of    the    first    house'' 
may    mean    an    upstart.        See    also 
Dyce's    note    on     Fletcher's    Women 
J'i'eased,  I.  iii.  (vol.  vii.  p.  16),  where 
the  expression  occurs. 

27.  first  and  second  cause}  Compare 
Lore1  s  Labour  s  Lost,  I.  ii.  184,  and  As 
Yon  Like  It,    v.    iv.    52-69,    for   the 
methodised   causes  of  quarrel.      It  is 
doubtful  whether  Yincentio  Saviola's 
"  Of  honor  and  honorable  Quarrels" 
in    his    Practice    of   the    Rapier  and 
Da^'cr  is  alluded  to  in  As  You  Li/:c 
It.' 

28.  passado}  Explained  by  Saviola 
as   a   step   forward   or  aside    in    fenc- 
ing ;    see  Love's  Labour  s  Lost,   ].   ii. 
185. 

28.  pun/o  rer'erso}  a  back-handed 
stroke:  Saviola:  "You  may  give 
him  a  pun/a  either  drilta  or  riverta."1 

28.  hav}  a  home-thrust,  Ital.  liai, 
thou  hast  (it).  Compare  Lat.  habtf, 
exclaimed  when  a  gladiator  was 
wounded.  (New  Eng.  Diet.) 


70  ROMEO   A^TD   JULIET         [ACTH. 

fantasticoes,  these  new  tuners  of  accents  ! 
"  By  Jesu,  a  very  good  blade  !  a  very  tall  man  !  a 
very  good  whore  !  "  Why,  is  not  this  a  lament- 
able thing,  grandsire,  that  we  should  be  thus 
afflicted  with  these  strange  flies,  these  fashion-  35 
mongers,  these  pardonnez-mois,  who  stand  so 
much  on  the  new  form  that  they  cannot  sit  at 
ease  on  the  old  bench  ?  O,  their  bons,  their 
bans  \ 

Enter  ROMEO. 

Ben.   Here  comes  Romeo,  here  comes  Romeo.  40 

Mer.   Without  his  roe,  like  a  dried  herring.      O  flesh, 

31.  fantasticoes}  Q  I  ;  phantacies  Q,  F  ;  accents}  Q  i  ;  accent  Q,  F.  32. 
B)'~\  Q  r>  Q;  omitted  F.  36.  pardonnez-mois]  Collier,  from  Theobald; 
pardonmees  O  I  ;  pardons  mees  Q  ;  pardona-mees  Qq  4,  5  ;  pardon-mee:s  F. 
38,  39.  bons  .  .  .  bons]  Theobald  (printing  bon'.s)  ;  bones  .  .  .  bones  Q,  F,  and 
several  editors.  40.  Here  .  .  .  Romeo}  only  once  in  Q  I. 

31.  fantasticoes}    Steevens    quotes     meaning  of  form  =  seat  or  bench, — 
Dekker,    Old  Fortimatits  :   "  1    have     that  they  cannot  sit  at  ease,  etc. 

.    .   .  sc&nfanlasticces,  conversed  with  38,    39.     bons]     Malone     confirms 

humourists."  Theobald's  emendation  of  bones  (\v\\.\\, 

32.  tall}  sturdy,   lusty,   valiant,    as  however,  a  play  on  that  word),   by  a 
frequently  in  Shakespeare.  passage    from    Greene's    Tii    tjuoque, 

34.  grandsire}  The  staid  Benvolio  from  which   we   learn   that    ban  jour 
addressed    as    if  he    belonged    to   an  was  the  common  salutation  of  those 
elder  generation.  who  affected  to  appear  fine  gentlemen  : 

35.  flies}  Compare  the  description  "No,    I    want    the    ban  jour    .    .     . 
of  Osric  as  a  "  water-fly,"  Hamlet,  v.  which      yonder       gentleman      has." 
ii.     84,     and     "gilded     butterflies,"  Possibly,  as  Capell  says,  there  is  an 
courtiers  in  Lear,  v.  iii.  13.  allusion  to  "the  French  disease." 

36.  pardonnez-mois]    The   reading  41.   roc}  Seymour  has  the  grotesque 
of  (v>q  4,  5  supports  the  form  adopted  notion  that  Romeo  without  his  roe  is 
by  Cambridge   editors,  pcrdona-mfs.  inco,  or  0,  me  !  a  lover's  sigh.      Kolfe 
But  Frenchified  gallants  seem  to  be  thinks  roc  may  mean   mistress  (from 
the  object  of  mockery.      In  \Vest-ward  the   female    deer).     Why  has  not  an 
Hoe  (Pearson's    Dekker,   ii.   p.   355),  "ingenious     gentleman"     said    that 
we  have  the  hfrnpardona  nwy.  roc  stands  for  /iVsaline  ?     "A  herring 

36,  38.  stand  .  .  .  bench}  who  without  a  roe"  is  the  crowning  corn- 
insist  so  much  on  the  new  mode  of  parison  of  Menelaus  with  contempt- 
manners,  or  of  clothes,  possibly  the  ible  creatures  put  into  Thersites' 
large  breeches,  which  made  sitting  mouth,  Troilus  and  Cressida,  v.  i. 
difficult  —  with  a  quibble  on  the  168. 


SC.  IV.] 


ROMEO   AND   JULIET 


71 


flesh,  how  art  thou  fishificd  !     Now  is  he  for  the 
numbers   that   Petrarch    flowed   in :    Laura   to 
his    lady    was    but   a   kitchen-\vench ;    marry, 
she  had  a  better  love  to  be-rhyme  her;  Dido,      45 
a    dowdy;    Cleopatra,    a    gipsy;     Helen    and 
Hero,    hildings    and    harlots;   Thisbe,   a   grey 
eye  or  so,  but    not  to  the  purpose. — Signior 
Romeo,  bon  jour  \   there  's  a  French  salutation 
to    your    French    slop.        You     gave    us    the      50 
counterfeit   fairly  last  night. 

Rom.   Good  morrow  to  you  both.      What  counterfeit 
did  I  give  you  ? 

Mer.   The    slip,    sir,  the    slip ;    can    you    not    con- 
ceive ? 


44.  was  1'it!1]  O  i  ;  was  Q,  F. 

46.  dowdy]  slattern.  Rich,  /'«;v- 
well  to  Military  Professiott(\$%l} :  "If 
plaine  or  homely,  we  say  she  is  a 
doudie  or  a  slut." 

46.  gipsy]   because  Egyptian,  and 
dark  of  hue.     This  passage  is  jestingly 
alluded    to    in     The    Return*  from 
Parnassus,  in.  i.  (p.  57,  eel.  Macray). 

47.  hildings}     worthless     persons ; 
used    by    Shakespeare    of    both    men 
and  women.      See  in.  v.  168. 

47,  48.  grey  ere]  In  Two  Gent,  of 
Verona,  iv.  iv.  197,  we  have  (Chaucer's 
comparison)  eyes,  "  grey  as  glass"  ; 
in  Sir  Eglamoitr  line  86 1  :  "  eyen 
grey  as  crystalle  stone "  ;  in  The 
Returns  from  Parnassus,  \,  i.  (p.  31, 
cd.  Macray),  of  silver  money  :  "my 
purse  wants  these  grey  silver  eyes 
that  stand  idelye  in  the  face  of  a 
citizen's  daughter."  It  is  certain, 
however,  that  grey  in  Elizabethan 
literature  (and  I  think  in  a  few 
passages  of  Shakespeare)  means 
sometimes  bluish.  Cotgrave  has 
"  Rluard,  gray,  skie  coloured, 


55 


blewish."  C(csius  is  explained  by 
Cooper,  Thesaurus  (1573):  "Gray, 
skie  colour  with  speckes  of  gray, 
blunket  "  (i.e.  greyish  blue)  ;  Glaiicns, 
says  Cooper,  "is  commonly  taken 
for  blewe  or  gray  like  the  skie  with 
speckes  as  Ciesiiis  is,  but  I  thinke  it 
rather  reddie, "  etc.  Unless  we 
understand  grey  as  bluish,  Shake- 
speare nowhere  speaks  of  blue  eyes 
in  our  meaning.  lie  praises  blue- 
veined  eyelids.  "  Blue  eyes"  with 
him  means  having  a  bluish  circle 
round  the  eyes. 

48.  but  not]  Ilanmer  (after  War- 
burton)  reads  but  now. 

50.  French  slop]  large,  loose 
trousers,  as  in  Much  Ado,  in.  ii.  36. 

54.  slip]  a  piece  of  false  money 
(with  a  play  on  the  word).  Greene, 
in  Thieves  falling  out,  has:  "certain 
slips,  which  are  counterfeit  pieces  of 
money.''  So  Trail  us  and  Cressida,  n. 
iii.  27  :  "  If  I  could  have  remembered 
a  gilt  counterfeit,  thou  wouldst  not 
have  slipped  d\\\.  of  my  contemplation.''' 


72  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  H. 

Rom.   Pardon,  good  Mercutio,  my  business  was  great ; 

and  in  such  a  case  as  mine  a  man  may  strain 

courtesy. 
Mer.   That 's  as  much  as  to  say,  such  a  case  as  yours 

constrains  a  man  to  bow  in  the  hams.  60 

Rom.   Meaning,  to  court'sy. 
Mer.   Thou  hast  most  kindly  hit  it. 
Rom.   A  most  courteous  exposition. 
Mer.   Nay,  I  am  the  very  pink  of  courtesy. 
Rom.   Pink  for  flower.  65 

Mer.   Right. 

Rom.   Why,  then  is  my  pump  well  flowered. 
Mer.  Well  said ;  follow  me  this  jest  now  till  thou 

hast  worn  out  thy  pump,  that  when  the  single 

sole  of  it  is  worn,  the  jest  may  remain,  after      70 

the  wearing,  solely  singular. 
Rom.  O    single-soled    jest,  solely  singular  for  the 

singleness  ! 

56.  good]  O,  omitted  F.         68.    Well  said]  Q  I,  Sure  wit  Q,  Sure  wit,  F. 
71.   solely  singular  Q  I,  Q  ;  sole-singular  F. 

57)   5$-   strain  courtesy"]  So  Chap-  Gabriel's  pumps  were  all  unpink'dV 

man,    Alphonsits,    V.    ii.  :     "Mere's  the  heel/' 

straining  courtesy  at  a  bitter  feast."  72.   single-soled]  mean,     contempt- 
Go,   hams]  So  in    The  Merry  Devil  ible.       Single     is     used     alone     (in 
of  Edmonton   (Ila/.litts   Dodsley,    x.  quibbling)    for    simple,    silly,    as    in 
221):    "do    I    bend   in   the   hams?"  Coriolauits,  II.  i.  40;  soled  is  perhaps 
(spoken  of  in  a  way  which  illustrates  used  with  a  ((nibble  on  sou!.     Holin- 
tliis  passage).  shed,  Ireland,  p.  23  :  "a  meane  tower 
62.   kindly]  naturally,  hence  pcrlin-  might    serve   such    single-soale   kings 
ently,  appropriately.  as  were    at    those  days    in    Ireland  " 
64.  pink]      So       Beaumont      and  (Malonc).        Steevens     quotes     from 
Fletcher,    The  Pilgrim,   I.  ii.  :    "this  Dckkcr'sfFtWivyW  Yeare:  "a sing/e- 
is  the  prettiest  pilgrim,   The  pink  of  .w/c/fidlcr" ;  Cotgrave defines  "Gentil- 
pilgrims. "  hommc  de  has   relief,"  a  thred-bare, 
67.    flowered}     because     Romeo's  or    single     soled     gentleman.        Our 
pumps  were  pinked,  i.e.   punched   in  slang    "one-horse"    corresponds    in 
holes  with  figures.    Compare  Taming  meaning.        Singleness     in     line     73 
of  the   Shrew,    \\ .    i.     136:     "And  means  simplicity  or  silliness. 


sc.  iv.]          ROMEO    AND   JULIET  73 

Mer.  Come  between   us,  good    Benvolio ;    my  wits 

faint.  7  5 

Rom.   Switch  and   spurs,  switch   and   spurs  ;   or  I  '11 
cry  a  match. 

Mer.  Nay,   if   our  wits   run    the  wild-goose  chase, 
I  am   done  ;  for  thou   hast  more  of  the  wild- 
goose  in  one  of  thy  wits  than,  I   am  sure,  I      80 
have  in  my  whole  five.     Was  I  with  you  there 
for  the  goose  ? 

Rom.  Thou  wast  never  with  me  for  any  thing  when 
thou  wast  not  there  for  the  goose. 

Mer.   I  will  bite  thee  by  the  ear  for  that  jest.  85 

Rom.   Nay,  good  goose,  bite  not. 

Mer.  Thy  wit  is  a  very  bitter  sweeting ;  it  is  a  most 
sharp  sauce. 

Rom.  And  is  it  not  well  served  in  to  a  sweet  goose? 

74,  75.  wits  faint'}  Q  5  ;  wits  faints  Q,  F  ;  wit  faints  Ff  2-4  ;  wits  fail  O  I. 
76.   Switch  .   .   .   switch]  Pope  ;  Swits  .   .   .  swits  O,   F.  78-    °}tr  «'//r] 

Q,  F  ;  thy  wits  Q  I.  79.  /  am}  O,  F  ;  /  hare  Q  i.  83.  Thou  wast]  O,  F  ; 
Thou  -vert  Q  I.  87.  bitter  sweating}  Q,  Sitter-sweeting  F.  89.  well] 
F,  then  well  O  ;  in  to}  Q  I,  Q  ;  into  F. 

76.  Switch  and  spurs]  So  Dekker,      170:  "What,  do  you  grumble?    I'll 
Honest    Whore,  Part    II.    (Pearson's     be  with  you  straight." 

Dekker,   ii.    p.   96)  :   "  Oh,   we  shall         85.   bite  thee  by  the   ear]  i.e.   as  a 

ride  switch  and  spurre."  sign  of  fondness  (as   one  horse  does 

77.  match]  wager.       Capell    reads  another).       Jonson,     Alchemist,     n. 
for  I  cry  a  match.  iii.  :   "  Slave,  I  could  bite  thine  car." 

"8.   wild-goose   chase]    Holt  White  So    the    French    Mordrc    forcing   <}, 

describes  this  as  a  race  of  two  horses  ;  explained  by  Cotgrave  "as  much  as 

the    rider    who    takes    the    lead    may  JJa/lcr    ou     carcsscr     mignontiemtnt, 

choose  what   ground  he  pleases  ;  the  wherein  the  biting  of  th'  eare  is,  with 

other  must  follow,  unless  he  can  in  some,  an  usual!  Action." 

turn  take  the  lead.    Burton,  Anatomy  86.   bite  not]  Kay,  rrovcrbs  (p.  56, 

of  Melancholy    (p.     266,    ed.    1632).  ed.    I/6S),    gives,    as   a    "joculatory 

names  this  among    "the  disports   of  proverb,"  "  Good  goose  do  not  bite.'' 

great  men."  87.   bitter  sweeting]  The    name  of 

Si.   ?'•////  ycii]  Was  I  even  with  you,  an  apple  ;  the  usual  form  of  the  word 

with  respect  to  the  goose?     As  per-  is  bitter-sweet.     Huloet,  Abeccdarium, 

haps  in  Taming  of  the  Shrew,   iv.   i.  1552:   "  Apple  called  a  bytter  swetc, 

ctinciriirieHiim." 


74  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACTH. 

Mer.   O,  here  's  a  wit  of  cheveril,  that  stretches  from      90 
an  inch  narrow  to  an  ell  broad  ! 

Rom.  I  stretch  it  out  for  that  word  "  broad  "  ;  which 
added  to  the  goose,  proves  thee  far  and  wide 
a  broad  goose. 

Mer.  Why,  is  not  this  better  now  than  groaning  for  95 
love  ?  now  art  thou  sociable,  now  art  thou 
Romeo ;  now  art  thou  what  thou  art,  by  art 
as  well  as  by  nature :  for  this  drivelling  love 
is  like  a  great  natural,  that  runs  lolling  up  and 
down  to  hide  his  bauble  in  a  hole.  100 

Ben.  Stop  there,  stop  there. 

Mer.  Thou  desirest  me  to  stop  in  my  tale  against 
the  hair. 

Ben.  Thou  wouldst  else  have  made  thy  tale  large. 

Mer.  O,  thou  art  deceived;   I  would  have   made  it    105 
short ;  for   I  was  come  to  the  whole  depth  of 
my  tale,   and    meant    indeed    to    occupy    the 
argument  no  longer. 

94.   a  broad]  Q  I,  Q  ;  abroad '  F.          106.  for]  O  I,  Q  ;  or  F. 

90.   cheveril]  kid  leather  (Fr.   cuir  99.   natural}  fool,   idiot,  as    in  As 

de  chevreuil};  so  Twelfth  Night,  in.  You  Like  It,  I.  ii.  52,  57. 

i.  13:  "  A  sentence  is  but  a  cheveril  100.  bauble]  The  fool's  short  stick, 

glove  to  a  good  wit."  ornamented  with  a  fool's  head,   doll, 

94.     a    broad   goose]    Broad    may  or     puppet ;     an     inflated     skin     or 

mean  plain,  obvious  ;  used  of  words  bladder,   for  belabouring    those    who 

it  often  means  gross,  indecent ;  it  also  offended    him,     was    often    attached 

means  unrestrained.     Other  forms  of  (Douce  and  Dyce). 

spelling     were      broode     and     brood.  102,    103.   against  the  hair]  as  \ve 

Hence    there    is    probably  a  play  on  say,   against    the    grain.     See  Merry 

brood  goose,  which  we  find  in  Fletcher,  Wives,  11.  iii.  41,  and  "  merry  against 

Humorous  Lieutenant,   II.    i.  :    "To  the   hair,:)    Troilus  and   Crcssida,   I. 

make  us  cuckolds,  They  have  no  more  ii.  28. 

burden  than  a  brood-goose."     Collier  104.     large]      licentious;      "large 

and  Delius,  retaining  F  abroad,  read  jests,"  Much  Ado,  II.  iii.  206. 

"  far  and  wide  abroad — goose, "which  107.   occupy]  with  a  quibble  on  the 

may  be  right.  meaning  alluded  to  in  2  Henry  IV. 

ii.  iv.  161. 


sc.iv.]         ROMEO   AND   JULIET  75 

Rom.   Here  's  goodly  gear  ! 

Enter  Nurse  and  PETER. 

Mer.  A  sail,  a  sail !  I  i  o 

Ben.   Two,  two  ;  a  shirt  and  a  smock. 

Nurse.   Peter  ! 

Peter.  Anon  ? 

Nurse.   My  fan,  Peter. 

Mer.   Good   Peter,  to  hide  her   face  ;  for  her  fan  's     115 

the  fairer  of  the  two. 

Nurse.   God  ye  good  morrow,  gentlemen. 
Mer.  God  ye  good  den,  fair  gentlewoman. 
Nurse.   Is  it  good  den  ? 
Mer.  Tis  no  less,  I  tell  you;   for  the  bawdy  hand    120 

of  the  dial  is  now  upon  the  prick  of  noon. 
Nurse.   Out  upon  you  !   what  a  man  are  you  ! 
Rom.   One,  gentlewoman,  that   God  hath  made  for 

himself  to  mar. 

109.  Enter  .  .  .]  Enter  Nurse  and  her  man  Q,  F  (after  longer,  loS). 
1 10.  „•/  sail,  a.  sail]  O,  F  (but  continued  to  Romeo)  ;  .-/  sail,  a  sail,  a  sail. 
O  I  (given  to  Mercutio).  III.  Ben.]  O  I;  Mer.  O,  F.  112-115. 

Peter!  .  .  .  Peter}  (^,  F;  Peter,  free  thee  give  me  my  fan.  Mer.  Pree  thcc 
doo  food  Peter,  Q  i.  113.  Anon  .']  Theobald  ;  Anon.  (),  F.  1 15.  face  :] 
F  3,  face,  Q,  face  ?  F.  116.  fairer  .  .  .  two]  O  I,  fairer  face,  (.^fairer 
face .'  F.  1 20.  you}  F,  ycc  (^.  123,  1 24.  for  himself}  Q  i  ;  hii/iselfQ,  F. 

109.  ."far}  GVrt;' is  used  for  talk,  and,  114.  fan}  Compare  Lore's  Labour's 

in  a  depreciatory  sense,  rubbishy  talk  :  Lost,  IV.   i.  147:    ''To  see  him  walk 

also  for  stuff,  and,   in  a  depreciatory  before  a  lady  and  to  bear  her  fan  !  " 

sense,    rubbish.      It  is    also    used  for  Farmer   quotes    The    Serving  Man's 

apparel,     attire.        Probably     Romeo  Comfort,  1598:   "The  mistress  must 

relers  to  the    preceding   talk,    not  to  have    one    to    carry    her   cloake    and 

the  habiliments    of   the    approaching  hood,  another  \\cr  faiinc.'' 

nurse.  117.    Cod  ye}   short    for    God  give 

ill.   lien.]      Henvolio,       slow     to  ye:  on  good  den,  see  I.  ii.  57. 

kindle,  is  caught  into  the  fire  of  fun  ;  121.  prick  of  noon}  point  or  mark 

see    line     138.        But    some    editors  of   noon;    so     "noontide    prick,"    .)' 

accept  the    arrangement    of  speeches  Henry    VI.   I.   iv.    34,   and    Lucrece. 

in  l^t,  F.  line  781. 


76  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  H. 

Nurse.   By  my  troth,  it  is  well  said  ;  "  for  himself  to    125 
mar,"    quoth     a'  ?       Gentlemen,    can     any    of 
you    tell    me    where    I    may  find    the  young 
Romeo  ? 

Rom.   I   can  tell    you ;    but  young  Romeo  will  be 

older  when   you  have   found   him   than  he  was    130 
when  you  sought  him  :   I   am   the  youngest  of 
that  name,  for  fault  of  a  worse. 

Nurse.  You  say  well. 

Mer.  Yea,    is    the    worst  well  ?  very    well  took,  i' 

faith  ;  wisely,  wisely.  135 

Nurse.  If  you  be  he,  sir,  I  desire  some  confidence 
with  you. 

Ben.  She  will  indite  him  to  some  supper. 

Mer.   A  bawd,  a  bawd,  a  bawd  !      So  ho  ! 

Rom.  What  hast  thou  found?  140 

Mer.  No  hare,  sir ;  unless  a  hare,  sir,  in  a  lenten 
pie,  that  is  something  stale  and  hoar  ere  it  be 
spent. —  \Sings. 

125.  well  said]  O  I,  Q  ;  saidY.  126.  Gcntkmen~\  O,  F  (some  copies  F 
Gentleman}.  134.  well?}  ()  5;  well,  Q,  F.  138.  indite}  Q,  F  (endite)  ; 
invite  Q  i,  Ff  2-4.  143.  Sings]  O  i  has  "  He  vvalkes  by  them,  and  sings." 

136.   confidence}   The    same  jest  of  Romeo  .   .    .   asks,    'What    hast  thou 

blundering  on  confidence  for  conference  found  ?  ;  "     Madden,  Diary  of  Blaster 

appears  in  Merry    Wives,  I.   iv.    172  William  Silence,  p.  173. 
(Mrs.  (Quickly),  and  in  Much  Ado,  in.          141.   hare}    The    word     seems    to 

v-    3    (Dogberry).       ()    i    here  reads  have  been  used   for  courtesan.       See 

conference.  the  use  of  '"hare-pie"  in  Rowley,  A 

138.  indite}  Bern-olio  follows    suit  Match      at      Midnight.        (Hazlitt's 
and  transforms  invite  to  indite.      O  i  Dodsley,  xiii.  p.  88.) 

reads  invite,   and  omits    sonic  before          142.  'hoar}  mould}-.  New  Eng.  Diet, 

suffer.  quotes  Sylvester's  Du  Barlas  :   "  The 

139.  So    ho!}    "'As    soon    as    he  long  journey  we  have  gone,  hath   .   .    . 
espieth  her  [the  harej,  he    must    cry  turn'd    our   victuals    hoar."     Malonc 
So  how.''     Thus  writes  the  author  of  supposes    the    quibbling    verses    that 
the  Noble  Arte  [of  Venerie}  .  .  .  And  follow  to  be  part  of  an  old  song. 

so    when    Mcrcutio    cried    So    ho!, 


sc.  iv.]         ROMEO   AND   JULIET 


77 


An  old  hare  hoar, 

A  nd  an  old  hare  hoar,  145 

Is  very  good  meat  in  Lent  : 

But  a  hare  that  is  hoar, 

Is  too  much  for  a  score, 
When  it  hoars  ere  it  be  spent. — 

Romeo,  will  you  come  to  your  father's?   we'll    150 
to  dinner  thither. 

Rom,   I  will  follow  you. 

filer.  Farewell,    ancient     lady  ;    farewell,    \singing\ 
"lady,  lady,  lady" 

\Excunt  Mercutio  and  Benvolio. 

Nurse.   Marry,    farewell! — I    pray    you,    sir,    what    155 
saucy  merchant  was  this,  that  was  so   full  of 
his  ropery  ? 

Rom.  A  gentleman,  nurse,  that  loves  to  hear  him- 
self talk,  and  will  speak  more  in  a  minute  than 
he  will  stand  to  in  a  month.  160 


153.    singing]   Dyce   (Farmer   conj.). 
omitted  Q,  F. 


155.    Marry,  farewell!]   Q    I 


154.  "lady  .  .  .  lady':]  from  the 
ballad  of  Susanna,  quoted  in  Twelfth 
Night,  II.  iii.  85.  Perhaps  part  of  the 
mockery  lies  in  bringing  the  Nurse  into 
relation  with  the  "woman  fair  and 
virtuous,  Lady,  lady  "  of  the  ballad. 
See  "a  goodly  lady,  O  lady,  lady"  in 
The  Rare  Triumphs  of  Love  and 
Fortune  (1589),  llazlitt's  Dodsley's 
Old  Plays,  vi.  p.  198. 

156.  saucy  merchant]  impudent 
fellow  ;  merchant  is  used  like  chap, 
a  shortened  form  of  chapman. 
Steevens  quotes  Churchyard's  Chance, 
1580:  ';  What  sausie  merchaunt  speak  - 
eth  now,  saied  Venus."  So  Udall, 
Diot replies  (1588),  p.  n,  ed.  Arber. 


157.  ropery]  rascality;  altered  to 
roguery  in  F  4.  The  same  change 
was  made  in  Beaumont  and  Fletcher, 
The  Chances,  in.  i.,  where  the  first 
folio  reads  :  "  You  '11  leave  this  ropery 
When  you  come  to  my  years." 
Steevens  quotes  The  Three  Ladies  of 
London,  1 584  :  ' '  Thou  art  very  pleas- 
ant and  full  of  thy  roperye."  O  I 
has  roperipe,  which,  as  an  adjective, 
meant  ripe  for  hanging,  lewd,  un- 
gracious, and  so  appears  in  Minsheu's 
and  Rider's  Dictionaries.  Compare 
rope-triiks  in  Taming  of  the  ^/ii^-i1, 
I.  ii.  112. 


78  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  n. 

Nurse.  An  a'  speak  anything  against  me,  I  '11  take 
him  down,  an  a'  were  lustier  than  he  is,  and 
twenty  such  Jacks ;  and  if  I  cannot,  I  '11  find 
those  that  shall.  Scurvy  knave !  I  am  none 
of  his  flirt-gills  ;  I  am  none  of  his  skains-mates.  165 
— [To  Peter.']  And  thou  must  stand  by  too, 
and  suffer  every  knave  to  use  me  at  his 
pleasure  ? 

Peter.   I    saw    no   man    use   you    at    his    pleasure ; 

if  I    had,    my   weapon    should    quickly    have    1 70 
been    out,    I    warrant     you.       I     dare     draw 
as     soon     as     another    man,    if    I    see    occa- 
sion in  a  good   quarrel,  and   the  law  on   my 
side. 

Nurse.  Now,  afore  God,  I   am  so  vexed,  that  every    175 

161,  162.  An}  Pope  ;  And  Q,  F.  165.  flirt-gills}  Q  I,  Q,  F  ;  gil-fluris 
Qq  4,  5  ;  skains-mates}  hyphened  first  in  F  4.  1 66.  To  Peter]  Q  I 
has  "She  turnes  to  Peter  her  man."  171.  out,  I  warrant  you.  ]  Rowe, 
out:  I  warrant  you  Q,  out,  I  -warrant  you,  F. 

163.  Jacks}  Often  in  Shakespeare  none  of  his  skains-mates."  Douce 

and  other  writers  used  contemptu-  supposes  that  sempstresses  is  meant, 

ously  for  fellow,  as  in  Merchant  of  from  "  skein  "  of  thread.  This  seems 

Venice,  in.  iv.  77.  to  me  not  improbable,  for  sempsters 

165.  flirt-gills}  Another  form  is  (fern.)  had  an  ill  repute  ;  so  Westward 

gill-flirt;  a  woman  of  light  or  loose  Hoe  (Pearson's  Uekker,  ii.  p.  291), 

behaviour;  &\soJKrt-giman(Gill&n<i  "as  stale  as  ...  an  Exchange 

Gillian  for  Juliana).  Gill  was  sempster ";  and  compare  the  opening 

commonly  used  for  wench,  as  in  of  the  The  Roaring  Girl,  where  Mary 

"Every  Jack  must  have  his  Gill."  Fitzallard,  disguised  as  a  sempster,  is 

Beaumont  and  Fletcher,  Knight  of  addressed  as  "emblem  of  fragility," 

the  Burning  Pestle,  iv.  i.  :  "You  and  is  assumed  to  have  immoral 

heard  him  take  me  up  like  a  flirt  Gill,  designs.  M.  Mason  suggests  a 

and  sing  bandy  songs  upon  me."  blunder  for  kinsmates  (kins-mates, 

165.  skains-mates}  Not  explained  Professor  Littledale  suggests,  =  mates 
with  certainty.  Malone  supposed  it  of  his  kind;  see  Skeat's  Chaucer,  Glos- 
to  mean  cut-throat  companions,  from  sary,  Noskinnes}.  Walker,  "scurvy 
skain  or  skene  (a  word  well  known  to  mates."  Staunton  says  that  a  Kentish- 
Elizabethan  writers),  a  knife.  To  get  man  told  him  that  skain  was  formerly 
the  sex,  that  seems  the  more  suitable,  a  familiar  term  in  parts  of  Kent  for 
Kinnear  conjectures,  "I  am  for  scape-grace. 


sc.iv.]          ROMEO   AND   JULIET  79 

part  about  me  quivers.  Scurvy  knave  ! — Pray 
you,  sir,  a  word  ;  and  as  I  told  you,  my  young 
lady  bade  me  inquire  you  out ;  what  she  bade 
me  say  I  will  keep  to  myself;  but  first  let  me 
tell  ye,  if  ye  should  lead  her  into  a  fool's  para-  180 
disc,  as  they  say,  it  were  a  very  gross  kind  of 
behaviour,  as  they  say  :  for  the  gentlewoman 
is  young,  and  therefore,  if  you  should  deal 
double  with  her,  truly  it  were  an  ill  thing 
to  be  offered  to  any  gentlewoman,  and  very  185 
weak  dealing. 

Rum.  Nurse,     commend     me     to     thy     lady     and 
mistress.      I  protest  unto  thee — 

Nurse,   Good   heart,  and,  i'  faith,  I  will   tell  her  as 

much.      Lord,    Lord,    she    will     be     a    joyful    190 
woman. 

Rom.  What  wilt  thou  tell  her,  nurse  ?  thou  dost  not 
mark  me. 

Nurse.    I    will    tell    her,    sir,    that    you    do    protest ; 

which,     as     I     take     it,    is     a     gentlemanlike    195 
offer. 


iSo.  fooP  s  paradisc\  Not  uncommon,  -wak  in  all  his  doings."  Coclcs, 
So  Rich,  Farewell  to  Military  Pro-  Epitome  of  Art  of  Phisiognoniie, 
fession  (1581),  "By  praising  of  our  Englished  by  T.  Ilyll  (?  1613).  I'os- 
beautie,  you  [men]  think  to  bring  us  sibly  the  word  was  chosen  for  sake 
into  a  fooles  paradise."  of  the  incongruity  of  what  is  double 
186.  iveak  dealing}  Collier  (MS.)  being  thereby  weak.  Fleay  suggests 
has  wiiked,  which  perhaps  the  Nurse  tviike.,  used  by  Chaucer  and"  .->till  pro- 
meant.  Schmidt  explains  weak  as  vincially  for  wicked. 
stupid.  In  the  following  passage  it  iSS.  /  protest}  Daniel  pleads  for 
may  mean  shifty:  "The  forehead  O  i,  reading  "  Tell  her  I  protest — : 
sharp  -  pointing  .  .  .  declareth  that  as  responded  to  by  the  Nurse's  ''I 
man  to  be  vavn  or  a  liar,  unstable,  will  tell  her.'' 


80  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACTH. 

Rom.  Bid  her  devise 

Some  means  to  come  to  shrift  this  afternoon ; 

And  there  she  shall  at  Friar  Laurence'  cell 

Be     shrived     and     married.        Here     is     for     thy 
pains.  200 

Nurse.  No,  truly,  sir ;  not  a  penny. 
Rom.  Go  to  ;   I  say  you  shall. 

Nurse.  This  afternoon,  sir?  well,  she  shall  be  there. 
Rom.  And  stay,  good  nurse ;  behind  the  abbey-wall 

Within  this  hour  my  man  shall  be  with  thee,      205 

And  bring  thee  cords  made  like  a  tackled  stair ; 

Which  to  the  high  top-gallant  of  my  joy 

Must  be  my  convoy  in  the  secret  night. 

Farewell ;  be  trusty,  and  I  '11  quit  thy  pains ; 

Farewell;  commend  me  to  thy  mistress.  210 

Nurse.  Now  God  in  heaven  bless  thee  !    Hark  you,  sir. 
Rom.  What  say'st  thou,  my  dear  nurse? 
Nurse.   Is  your  man  secret  ?      Did  you  ne'er  hear  say, 

Two  may  keep  counsel,  putting  one  away  ? 

197,  198.  Bid  .  .  .  afternoon]  Delius  ;  two  lines  ending  shrift  and  after- 
noon Capell  ;  one  line  Q,  F  ;  prose  Qq  4,  5.  199.  Laurence'}  Pope  ; 
Lawrence  Q,  F.  204.  stay]  Q,  stay  thou  F;  nurse;  .  .  .  wall]  Grant 
White;  nurse  .  .  .  wall,  Q,  F  ;  nurse,  .  .  .  wall:  Pope  and  many 
editors.  209.  quit]  Q,  quite  F.  213,214.  Is  .  .  .  away  '?]  verse  Rowe  ; 
prose  Q,  F. 

197.  Bid]  Hudson  very  ingeniously  206.  stair]   series    of  steps,  as   in 

emends  :  Paradise  Lost,  iii.  540. 

"Bid  her   devise   some   means   to  207.  high     top -gallant]     Steevens 

come  to  shrift  quotes    Markham,    English  Arcadia, 

This  afternoon  at  Friar  Laurence'  1607:    "  the  high    top-gallant  of  his 

cell  ;  valour.'"'      Top-gallant    masts,    small 

And  there  she  shall  be  shrived  and  masts  fixed  to  the  heads  of  the  main 

married.     Here  and  fore  top-masts. 

Is  for  thy  pains."  210.    mistress]     frequently    a     tri- 

204.    mine  ;]  The   pointing    is   G.  syllable.     See   Walker,  Shakespeare's 

White's ;     Romeo     cannot    wi.sh    to  /  'ersification,  p.  47. 

delay    the    Nurse    on    her    return    to  214.    Two    .    .    ,   away]    So    Titus 

Juliet.     See  Scene  v.  76.  77.  Andronicus,  iv.  ii.    144:   "Two  may 


sc.  iv.]         ROMEO   AND   JULIET  81 

Rom.   I  warrant  thcc  my  man  's  as  true  as  steel.          2  i  5 

Nurse.  Well,  sir  ;  my  mistress  is  the  sweetest  lady 
—Lord,  Lord  !  when  'twas  a  little  prating 
thing — O,  there 's  a  nobleman  in  town,  one 
Paris,  that  would  fain  lay  knife  aboard  ;  but 
she,  good  soul,  had  as  lieve  sec  a  toad,  a  very  220 
toad,  as  see  him.  I  anger  her  sometimes,  and 
tell  her  that  Paris  is  the  propcrer  man  ;  but, 
I  '11  warrant  you,  when  I  say  so,  she  looks  as 
pale  as  any  clout  in  the  vcrsal  world.  Doth 
not  rosemary  and  Romeo  begin  both  with  a  225 
letter? 

Rom.   Ay,  nurse ;  what  of  that  ?   both  with  an  R. 

Nurse.  Ah,  mocker !    that 's  the  dog's  name ;   R   is 
for  the —      No  ;   I  know  it  begins  with  some 

215.  /  warrant}  Ff  2-4;  Warrant   Q,    I-~  ;  man's]    O  (mans},    man    F. 
216-236]    verse    Capell.  228.   Ah,]  Rowe  ;  A  Q,   I1';    dog's   name;]    F, 
dog,  name  (^>.           228,   229.   R  is  for  the —     No  ;]  Kitsun  conj.,   Delius  ;   A' 
is  for  the  no,  (),   F;    R  is  for  thec  ?     No:  Theobald  (VVarburton)  ;   R  is  for 
the  dog.     No;  Steevens,  1778  (Tyrwhitt  conj.),  and  many  editors. 

keep  counsel  when  the  third's  away."  Grosart's  Nas/tc,  v.  p.  253,  for  another 

Lyly    has    it    in    Euphites    cited    by  example. 

Rushton,     Shakespeare' 's    Euphuism,  222.  propcrer]      handsomer,      fre- 

p.  62.  quent  in   Shakespeare. 

216.  Well,    sir}  Capell    prints   the  224.   pale  .   .   .   clout] 
rest  of  the  scene  as  verse  ;  the  opening 

lines  fall  easily  into  verse,   but   ditfi- 
culties  appear  as  one  proceeds. 

217.  218.  Lord.  .  .  thing]  Follows     "At  this  Littletaith  looked  as  white 
Brooke's  poem  :  as  a  clout,"  i.e.  piece  of  cloth. 

"A  prety  babe  (quod  she)  it  was  224.     vcrsaf]     vulgarism    for    uni- 

when  it  was  yung,  vcrsal. 

Lord    how    it    could    full    pretely  225.   rosemary]  The  flower  for  re- 
have  prated  with  it  long."  membrnnce,    used   both   at   weddings 
219.   lay  knife  aboard]    So   Barry,  and   funerals.      See  note  on  Hamlet, 
Ram  Alley,    1611  :  "The  truth  is,  I  iv.  v.  174  (ed.  Dowden).     Compare 
have    laid    my    knife    aboard,     The  iv.  v.  79. 

widow,    sir,    is    wedded,''     Ha/lilt's  228.   dog's  name]  Ben  Jonson,  in  his 

Dodsley,   x.    372,    and    compare   the  Eng'ish   Grammar,  says:    "R  is  the 

same,  p.  282,  for  use  of  aboard.     See  dog's  letter,  and  hirreth  in  the  sound.'' 
6 


82 


ROMEO   AND   JULIET 


[ACT  ii. 


other     letter  —  and     she     hath    the    prettiest    230 
sententious   of  it,  of  you    and   rosemary,  that 
it  would  do  you  good  to  hear  it. 

Rom.  Commend  me  to  thy  lady.  \_Exit  Romeo. 

Nurse.   Ay,  a  thousand  times.      Peter  ! 

Peter.  Anon?  235 

Nurse.  Before,  and  apace.  {Exeunt. 


SCENE  V. —  TJic  Same.      Capulefs  Orchard. 

Enter  JULIET. 

Jul.   The  clock  struck  nine  when  I  did  send  the  nurse ; 
In  half  an  hour  she  promised  to  return. 

233.  Kxil  Romeo]  Ro\ve  ;  omitted  O,  F  ;  before  Peter  line  234  Dyce. 
234.  times.  Peter'.'}  Ilanmer.  times  Peter  O,  times.  Peter?  V.  235. 
Anon  ':}  Theobald  ;  Anon.  Q,  F.  236.  Before,  and  apace}  Q,  F  (without 
comma);  Peter  take  my  fanne,  and  ^oe  Before  O  I,  Steevens  ;  Peter  take  my 
fan,  and  go  before,  and  apace  Cambridge. 

Scene  V. 
Capulet's  Orchard]  Globe,  Capulet's  house  Rowc,  Capulet's  garden  Capell. 

So  Barclay  names  R  in  his  Ship  of 
J-'ooIs.  The  word  nr  serves  for  the 
name  of  the  letter  (see  A'ew  Eng. 
/)/<•/.)  and  as  a  verb  for  to  ^ro'vl ;  so 
Na>h,  Summer's  J.ast  //'///,  1600  : 
"  They  arre  and  bark  at  night  against 
the  moon.  "'  Th.ere  is  classical  autho- 
rity ;  that  of  Persius,  and  an  allusion 
by  Luciliiis.  A  pleasant  illustration 
appears  in  Caret's  Alvcarie,  where 
through  the  loop  of  the  large  capital 
R.  introducing  the  words  beginning 
\\ith  that  letter,  a  standing  dog  peers 
out  ;  this  design  is  peculiar  to  the 
letter  R  ;  the  letter,  says  Bard 
jocularly,  is  so  necessary,  "  no  man 
hath  any  colour  to  harke  against 
it.  .  .  .  PerMus  calleth  R  literam 
caninam."  Milton,  according  to 
Aubrey,  pronounced  r  very  hard — 
on  which  Dryden  remarked,  "  litcra 
canina,  the  dog-letter,  a  certain  sign 


of  a  satirical  wit."     Masson's  Life  of 
Milton,  vi.  679. 

228,229.  A'  is  for  the —  No  ;']  This 
conjecture  of  Ritson  is  happy  ;  but 
Theobald's  reading  "R  is  for  thee  ? 
No"  may  be  right.  While  Romeo, 
however,  addresses  the  Nurse  as  than, 
and  the  Nurse  so  addresses  1'etcr,  she 
addresses  Romeo  &•>  you. 

231.  sententious}  I  think  the  Nurse- 
means  sentences  m  the  sense  of  adages 
or  maxims,  as  in  JMcrchanl  of  Venice, 
I.  ii.  II  :  "  (jood  sentences  and  well 
pronounced."  Possibly  we  should 
read  sententious. 

236.  Jlefore,  and  apace}  The  "  take 
my  fan  :;  of  O  I  ma}'  have  been  an 
actor's  repetition  of  the  joke  of  line 
114,  and  irresistible  to  an  actor  ;  but 
O,  ]•'  are  content  to  let  the  Nurse 
make  her  exit  in  all  haste,  without 
now  thinking  of  her  dignity. 


sc.  v.]          ROMEO   AND   JULIET  83 

Perchance  she  cannot  meet  him  :  that 's  not  so. 
O,  she  is  lame !   love's  heralds  should  be  thoughts, 
Which    ten     times     faster     glide     than    the     sun's 
beams  5 

Driving  back  shadows  over  louring  hills : 
Therefore  do  nimble-pinioned  doves  draw  Love, 
And  therefore  hath  the  wind-swift  Cupid  wings. 
Now  is  the  sun  upon  the  highmost  hill 
Of  this  day's  journey,  and  from  nine  till  twelve     10 
Is  three  long  hours,  yet  she  is  not  come. 
Had  she  affections,  and  warm  youthful  blood, 
She  'd  be  as  swift  in  motion  as  a  ball ; 
My  words  would  bandy  her  to  my  sweet  love, 
And  his  to  me :  I  5 

But  old  folks,  many  feign  as  they  were  dead  ; 
Unwieldy,  slow,  heavy  and  pale  as  lead. — 

Enter  Ntirse,  ivitli  PETER. 
O  God,  she  comes  ! — O  honey  nurse,  what  news  ? 

4.   heralds}  ()   I,   O;  Herauld  F.  5.  glide}  F  4;  glides  Q,  F.  6. 

louring}    O,    F    (low ring) ;    lowering    Fuiness.  7.     nimhlc  -  pinioned} 

hyphen  Pope.  11.   Is  three}  (\\  3-5,   A  there  O,   /  three  F,   Ay  three 

Kowc.          13.   She'd]  F  2  ;  She  would  (J,  F.          16.  feign}  fain  (±,faine  F. 

4.   lores   heralds}   So    in   Chester's  9.   highinosl}  topmost,  as  in  Sonnets, 

Love's  Martyr,  1601   (ed.  Grosart,  p.  vii.  9. 

151):  14.   bandy}     Nitres:     Originally    a 

"My    inward    A/use    can    sing    of  term  at  tennis  ;  horn  bander,  Fr. 

nought  but  Love,  16.   many   feign}     Johnson     reads 

Thoughts  are  his  heralds. "  marry,  feign;  Grant  White,   marry, 

After    line    4   Q    I    adds    two    lines,  fa>e\  Keightley,  marry,  seem  ;  Dyce 

resembling  Act  v.  i.  64,  65  :  conjectured  move  y faith,  i.e.  move  r 

"And    runne     more    swift,     than  faith.     In  Q  "  And  his  to  me "  forms 

hastie  powder  fierd,  part  of  the  line  continued  to  u  dead,'' 

Doth    hurrio    from    the    fearfull  and  is  preceded  by  the  italic  letter  J/. 

Cannons  mouth."  Cambridge  editors  think  lines  16,  17 

6.  baek}  Collier  (MS.)  reads  black.  probably   an    interpolation.       Collier 

7.  Love}  love  O,   F,  but  Venus   is  (MS.)   reads:    "As  his   to   me:    but 
meant,    as   described  in    Venus   and  old  folks  seem  as  dead,"  and  substi- 
Adonis,  1190,  and  Tempest,  iv.  i.  94.  tutes  dull  for  pale. 


84  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  n. 

Hast  thou  met  with  him  ?      Send  thy  man  away. 
Nurse.  Peter,  stay  at  the  gate.  \_Exit  Peter.      20 

Jul.  Now,  good  sweet  nurse, — O  Lord,  why  look'st  thou 
sad? 

Though  news  be  sad,  yet  tell  them  merrily ; 

If  good,  thou  sham'st  the  music  of  sweet  news 

By  playing  it  to  me  with  so  sour  a  face. 
Nurse.   I  am  aweary  ;  give  me  leave  awhile  :  2  5 

Fie,  how  my  bones  ache !      What  a  jaunt  have   I 

had! 
Jul.   I  would  thou  hadst  my  bones,  and  I  thy  news. 

Nay,  come,  I   pray  thee,  speak  ;  good,  good   nurse, 

speak. 
Nurse.  Jesu,  what  haste  ?   can  you  not  stay  awhile  ? 

Do  you  not  see  that  I  am  out  of  breath?  30 

Jul.   How  art  thou  out  of  breath,  when  thou  hast  breath 

To  say  to  me  that  thou  art  out  of  breath  ? 

The  excuse  that  thou  dost  make  in  this  delay 

Is  longer  than  the  tale  thou  dost  excuse. 

Is  thy  news  good,  or  bad  ?  answer  to  that ;  35 

Say  either,  and  I  '11  stay  the  circumstance ; 

Let  me  be  satisfied,  is  't  good  or  bad  ? 
Nurse.   Well,  you  have  made   a   simple  choice ;  you 

know  not  how  to  choose  a  man.      Romeo  !   no, 


22.   thcm~\     Rnlfo:      "Shakespeare  reads:    "Lord    how    my  bones  ake. 

makes      news      both      singular     and  Oil  where 's  my  men  ?     Give  me  some 

plural";     for    the     latter,     compare  aquavits;." 

Much  Ado,  i.  ii.  4-6.  36.    fhruiiistance']     I  '11     wait     for 

26.  jaunl]     The     variant    jauncc  details  ;  compare  v.  iii.  180. 

appears    in    O    again     in     line     54.  38.   simple}      silly,     as      often     in 

Compare  Richard  II,  V.  v.  94.     Q  I  Skakespeare. 


sc.  v.]  ROMEO    AND   JULIET  85 

not  he ;   though  his   face  be  better  than  any      40 
man's,  yet  his   leg  excels  all   men's  ;  and   for 
a  hand,  and   a   foot,  and   a   body,  though  they 
be  not  to  be  talked  on,  yet  they  arc  past  com- 
pare.     He  is   not   the   flower  of  courtesy,  but, 
I  '11    warrant   him,   as    gentle   as   a   lamb.      Go      45 
thy    ways,    wench ;    serve    God.      What,    have 
you   dined   at   home  ? 

Jul.   No,  no  :  but  all  this  did  I  know  before. 

What  says  he  of  our  marriage  ?   what  of  that  ? 

Nurse.   Lord,     how     my     head     aches  !     what     a     head 
have   I !  50 

It  beats  as  it  would  fall  in  twenty  pieces. 
My  back  o'  t'  other  side, — O,  my  back,  my  back ! 
Beshrew  your  heart  for  sending  me  about, 
To  catch  my  death  with  jaunting  up  and  down. 

Jul.   I'  faith,  I  am  sorry  that  thou  art  not  well.  5  5 

Sweet,  sweet,  sweet   nurse,  tell   me,  what  says   my 
love  ? 

Nurse.  Your  love  says,  like  an  honest  gentleman, 
and  a  courteous,  and  a  kind,  and  a  handsome, 
and,  I  warrant,  a  virtuous, — Where  is  your 
mother  ?  60 

Jul.   Where  is  my  mother  !   why,  she  is  within  ; 

41.  leg\  O,  /t^.f  F.  42.  a  body']  (),  F;  a  baitdie  O  I  ;  body  Oq  4,  5  ; 
a  bawdy  Ff  2-4.  45.  gentle  as  a\  O,  tf-ittle  a  V.  48.  this]  Cj,  this  tint, 
F.  52.  O\  V,  a  O.  54.  jaunting}  O  4,  F;  iaiittsin^  O.  55.  not 
rev//]  O,  so  ivell  F,  .v<>  ill  F  2.  57-60,  Your  .  .  .  mother  ;\  prose  Cam- 
bridge editors  (S.  Walker  conjcct.);  three  lines  ending  gentleman  .  .  . 
handsome  .  .  .  mother'!  O,  F.  61,  62.]  as  arranged  by  Ro\ve. 

52.   o'  /'  oth<r  sit/i'1  The  Nurse  lias         57~6o]    Capell,    printing    as   verse, 
clapped   her    hand    to    her   forehead,     ends  the  second  at  awraw/ ;  Sleevens 
and    now    places    it    on    her    back,     at  handsome,  and, 
Collier  and  others  read,   "  My  back  ! 
o'  t'  other  side. — " 


86  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACT  n. 

Where  should  she  be  ?      How  oddly  thou  repliest ! 
"  Your  love  says,  like  an  honest  gentleman, 
Where  is  your  mother  ?  " 

Nurse.  O,  God's  lady  dear  ! 

Are  you  so  hot?   marry,  come  up,  I  trow;  65 

Is  this  the  poultice  for  my  aching  bones  ? 
Henceforward  do  your  messages  yourself. 

Jul.  Here  's  such  a  coil ! — come,  what  says  Romeo  ? 

Nurse.   Have  you  got  leave  to  go  to  shrift  to-day  ? 

Jul.    I  have.  70 

Nurse.   Then  hie  you  hence  to  Friar  Laurence'  cell ; 
There  stays  a  husband  to  make  you  a  wife : 
Now  comes  the  wanton  blood  up  in  your  cheeks, 
They  '11  be  in  scarlet  straight  at  any  news. 
Hie  you  to  church  ;    I  must  another  way,  75 

To  fetch  a  ladder,  by  the  which  your  love 
Must  climb  a  bird's  nest  soon  when  it  is  dark  ; 
I  am  the  drudge,  and  toil  in  your  delight ; 
But  you  shall  bear  the  burden  soon  at  night. 
Go  ;   I  '11  to  dinner;  hie  you  to  the  cell.  So 

Jul.   Hie  to  high  fortune  ! — Honest  nurse,  farewell. 

\Exeunt, 


68.   coil']  turmoil,   fuss,  as  often  in  my  news."     Perhaps  the  words  mean 

Shakespeare.       In  place  of  this   line  only  It  is  their  way  to  redden  at  any 

(,)  I  has  :  surprise. 

"Nay   stay   sweet    Nurse,    I   doo  80,  81.]  Instead  of  these  lines  O  i 

intreate  thee  now,  has  : — 

What  saves  my  Love,  my  Lord,  "  Doth  this  newes  please  you  now  ? 

my  A'onieo  ? "  lul.   How     doth     her    latter     words 

74.    They '//  .    .    .    tteius]    Hanmer  revive  my  hart, 

reads:   "They'll  be  in  scarlet  strait-  Thnnkes  gentle  Nurse,  dispatch 

way  at  my  news  ''  ;    S.    \Valker  con-  thv  busines, 

jectures :     "They    .    .    .    straight   at  And   He  not  faile  to  mecte  my 

my    next    news";     Keightley   reads:  Romeo.'' 
"They  will  be  straight  in  scarlet  at 


SC.YI.J          ROMEO    AND   JULIET  87 

SCKNK   VI. —  The  Same.     Friar  Laurence s  cell. 

Enter  Friar  LAURENCE  and  ROMEO. 

Fri.   So  smile  the  heavens  upon  this  holy  act, 
That  after-hours  with  sorrow  chide  us  not ! 

Row.   .Amen,  amen  !   but  come  what  sorrow  can, 
It  cannot  countervail  the  exchange  of  joy 
That  one  short  minute  gives  me  in  her  sight.  5 

Do  thou  but  close  our  hands  with  holy  words, 
Then  love-devouring  death  do  what  he  dare, 
It  is  enough  I  may  but  call  her  mine. 

Fri.   These  violent  delights  have  violent  ends, 

And  in  their  triumph  die,  like  fire  and  powder,     10 
Which  as  they  kiss  consume :    the  sweetest  honey 
Is  loathsome  in  his  own  deliciousness 
And  in  the  taste  confounds  the  appetite : 
Therefore  love  moderately  ;   long  love  doth  so  ; 
Too  swift  arrives  as  tardy  as  too  slow.  i  5 

Enter  JULIET. 
Here  comes  the  lady  :   O,  so  light  a  foot 

Eriar    Laurence's    cell]    Capell.         2.  after-hoiin~\    hyphen    Pope.         S. 
enough  /]  (,),  i  no  ugh.     I  E. 

Enter  .   .  .   ]  Eor  the  correspond-  16.  so  litftf  .   .   .  The  correspond- 
ing scene  in  ()  I,  see  p.  183.  ing  lines  in  Q  I  are  : 

9.    These    violent   .    .    .    J    Malone  "  So   light    of   foote    nere    hurts    the 

compares    Litcrcce,  line    894:    "Thy  troden  flower : 

violent    vanities     can     never     last";  Of    love    and     joy,    see    see    the 

Hollo  adds  Hamlet,  n.  i.  102,  103.  soveraigne  power.  ' 

12.  /}/.>]  its.  Critics    have    preferred     this    earlier 

13.  fonjounJi\  destroys,  ruins;  the  reading,  not  considering  the  dramatic 
most    frequent    meaning   of  confound  propriety    of    the     later    text.       The 
\\ith  Shakespeare.  moralising   Eriar  thinks  of  the  hard- 

ne>.s  and  sharpness  of  the  path  ot  lite. 


88  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  n. 

Will  ne'er  wear  out  the  everlasting  flint. 

A  lover  may  bestride  the  gossamer 

That  idles  in  the  wanton  summer  air, 

And  yet  not  fall ;  so  light  is  vanity.  20 

Jul.  Good  even  to  my  ghostly  confessor. 

Fri.   Romeo  shall  thank  thee,  daughter,  for  us  both. 

Jul.  As  much  to  him,  else  is  his  thanks  too  much. 

Rom.  Ah,  Juliet,  if  the  measure  of  thy  joy 

Be  heap'd  like  mine,  and  that  thy  skill  be  more    2  5 
To  blazon  it,  then  sweeten  with  thy  breath 
This  neighbour  air,  and  let  rich  music's  tongue 
Unfold  the  imagined  happiness  that  both 
Receive  in  either  by  this  dear  encounter. 

////.  Conceit,  more  rich  in  matter  than  in  words,  30 

Brags  of  his  substance,  not  of  ornament : 
They  are  but  beggars  that  can  count  their  worth ; 
But  my  true  love  is  grown  to  such  excess 
I  cannot  sum  up  sum  of  half  my  wealth. 

18,  19.  gossamer  .  ,  .  idles]  F  4  ;  ^ossamours,  .  .  .  ydchs  Q,  F.  23.  is\ 
Q,  in  F.  24.  Rom.]  Q,  Fri.  F.  27.  music  s~\  ¥,  inusicke  Q.  33. 
sucJi\  Q,  such  such  F.  34.  sum  up  sum  of  half  my}  Q  ;  sum  me  up  some  of 
halfe  my  Qq  4,  5,  F. 

1 8.  gossamer]    floating    thread    or  And  thou  art  come, 

threads  of  spider's  silk  (goose-summer,  Jitl.    I  am  (if  I  be  Day) 

possibly  from  its  downy  appearance  ;  Come  to  my  Sunne  :  shine  foorth, 

but  see  New  En*.    Diet,    for  objec-  and  make  me  faire." 

tions).        Malone     and     others    read  30.   Conceit  .  .  .  ]  Such  imagination 

"  gossamers  That  idle."  as    is    more    rich,    etc.     For    conceit 

21.   confessor]  accented  as  here  (on  compare  iv.  iii.  37. 

con]  by  Shakespeare  ;  the  variation  of  32.   worth'}  wealth,   as    in    Twelfth 

accent  in  Henry  VI II.  has  been  taken  Night,    III.     iii.     17.      For    the    idea 

as   one  of  the  indications  of  double  compare  Ant.   and  Cleop.    I.    i.    15: 

authorship.     In  O  I  Juliet's  first  word  "There's  beggary  in  the    love    that 

is  Romeo.      lie  responds  :  can  be  reckon'd." 

"  My     lulict    welcome.        As     doo  34.  sum  .   .   .  -wealth"}  No  emenda- 

waking  eyes  lion   is  required  ;  Capell's  has,   how- 

(Cloasd    in    Nights    mysts)    attend  ever,    found    favour    with    editors — 

the  frolicke  Day,  "sum  up  half  my  sum  of  wealth." 

So  Romeo  hath  expected  Iiilief, 


sc.i.]  HOMEO    AND   JULIET  89 

Fri.  Come,    come    with    me,   and    we    will    make    short 
work  ;  3  5 

For,  by  your  leaves,  you  shall  not  stay  alone 
Till  holy  church  incorporate  two  in  one.       [ILreunt. 


ACT  III 

SCENE  I.—  Verona.     A  public  Place. 

Enter  MERCUTIO,  BENVOLIO,  Page,  and  Servants. 

Ben.   I  pray  thee,  good  Mercutio,  let 's  retire : 
The  day  is  hot,  the  Capulets  abroad, 
And,  if  we  meet,  we  shall  not  scape  a  brawl ; 
For    now,    these     hot     days,    is     the     mad     blood 
stirring. 

Mer.  Thou  art  like  one  of  those  fellows  that  when  5 
he  enters  the  confines  of  a  tavern  claps  me  his 
sword  upon  the  table  and  says,  "  God  send  me 
no  need  of  thee  !  "  and  by  the  operation  of  the 
second  cup  draws  it  on  the  drawer,  when  in- 
deed there  is  no  need.  10 

Ben.  Am  I  like  such  a  fellow  ? 

Jllcr.  Come,  come,  thou   art   as   hot   a   Jack   in  thy 


3.   And,  if}  Walker  conjectured  and  Old  Plays,  'm.  p.   36:   "He  that  can 

Delius  reads  An  if.  clap  his  sword  upon  the  hoard,  lie's 

6,  7.  C/afa)Jie/ii'ssie0>'(f]A.l)'ra.\v\er's  a  brave  man." 

proceeding;    so,    describing   a   swag-  9.   if"]  The   him  (ethical  dative)  of 

gerer,  IIon>  a  Man   may  choose  a  good  (),  F  is  preferred  by  many  editors. 

Wife  from  a  bad,  llaziitt's  Uodsley's  12.  Jack}  See  II.  iv.  16.5. 


90  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 

mood  as  any  in   Italy,  and  as  soon   moved  to 
be  moody,  and  as  soon  moody  to  be  moved. 
Ben.  And  what  to?  15 

Mer.  Nay,  an  there  were  two  such,  we  should  have 
none    shortly,   for   one    would    kill    the    other. 
Thou  !   why,  thou  wilt  quarrel  with  a  man  that 
hath  a  hair  more  or  a  hair  less   in   his  beard 
than  thou  hast.      Thou  wilt  quarrel  with  a  man      20 
for  cracking  nuts,  having  no  other  reason  but 
because  thou  hast  hazel  eyes  ;  what  eye,  but 
such  an   eye,  would  spy  out  such  a  quarrel? 
Thy  head  is  as   full  of  quarrels  as  an  egg  is 
full  of  meat,  and  yet  thy  head  hath  been  beaten      2  5 
as  addle  as  an  egg  for  quarrelling.      Thou  hast 
quarrelled    with    a    man    for  coughing  in   the 
street,  because  he  hath  wakened  thy  dog  that 
hath  lain  asleep  in   the  sun.      Didst  thou   not 
fall    out    with    a    tailor    for    wearing   his    new      30 
doublet     before     Easter?     with     another,    for 
tying  his  new  shoes  with  old  riband  ?   and  yet 
thou  wilt  tutor  me  from  quarrelling ! 
Ben.   An  I  were  so  apt  to  quarrel   as  thou   art,  any 

man  should  buy  the   fee-simple  of  my  life  for      3  5 
an  hour  and  a  quarter. 

15.  fo]  Pope;  too  Q,  F.          16.   an]  Pope;  and  Q_,  F.         34.  An]  Capell ; 
And  O,  F. 

14.  inoody\  angry  ;    "in  thy  mood,''  24,   25.   as  an  egg  .   .   .]  So    Gam- 
in  thy  ill  humour  (compare  Two  Gent,  iner    Cm-ton!  s   Needle:    "An    egg    is 
of    Verona,    iv.    i.    51);    "moody   to  not   so  full  of  meat  as  she  is  full  of 
lie    moved"    means    "angry    to    be  lies,"  llazliu's  Dodsley's  Old  J^lays, 
aroused."  iii.  p.  240. 

15.  IV hat    to?]    moved     to    what?  33.  from  quarrelling  O   5  has  fur 
O,    F   have  too,  which    Staunton    re-  quarrelling,     which      some      editors 
tains,   explaining  -what  too  '?  as  what  follow. 

else  ?  what  more  ? 


sc.  i.j  ROMEO    AND   JULIET  91 

Mer.  The  fee-simple  !      O  simple  ! 

Enter  TV  I',  ALT  and  Others. 

Ben.   By  my  head,  here  come  the  Capulets. 

Mer.   By  my  heel,  I  care  not. 

Tyb.   Follow  me  close,  for  I  will  speak  to  them. —       40 

Gentlemen,  good  den  ;   a  word  with  one  of  you. 
Mer.   And  but  one  word  with  one  of  us  ?  couple  it 

with  something ;   make  it  a  word  and  a  blow. 
Tyb.  You  shall  find  me  apt  enough  to  that,  sir,  an 

you  will  give  me  occasion.  45 

Mer.  Could    you    not   take  some  occasion   without 

giving? 

Tyb.   Mercutio,  thou  consort'st  with  Romeo, — 
Mer.   Consort !   what,  dost  thou  make  us  minstrels  ? 

an  thou  make  minstrels  of  us,  look  to  hear  no-      50 

thing  but  discords:  here  's  my  fiddlestick ;  here  's 

that  shall  make  you  dance.      'Zounds,  consort ! 

37.  Enter  .  .  .  ]  I  larmier;  Enter  Tybalt,  Petruchio,  and  others  O,  F; 
transferred  by  many  editors  to  follow  line  38,  by  others  to  follow  line  39. 
38.  conic}  F  2,  O  5  ;  conies  (),  F  ;  cjnus  a  Capolct  ()  I.  42.  us  .'}  F,  us,  O. 
44  and  50.  an]  Capell  ;  and  Q,  F.  48.  Romeo, — ]  Capell ;  Roiuco.  (,),  F. 
52.  'Zounds'}  (,),  Come  F. 

37.   Enter  .   .   .   ]    The     I'ctruchio  had  actually  happened  in   the  history 

of  the  stage-direction  Q,  F  is  probably  of  the  word. 

the  "  young  Petruchio  "  named  by  the         49.   minstrels}  The  word  haclas>oci- 

Nurse  to  Juliet,  I.  v.  134.  ations   not   always    of   honour:     "If 

41.  good  den}  See  I.  ii.  57.  any  fencer,   bearward,   minstrel  .   .   . 

48.  consort'st}  "  It  is  probable  that  tinker,  pedlar,  .  .  .  have  wandered 
the  different  senses  of  consort  had  two  abroad,"  he  is  declared  a  rogue, 
or  even  three  different  origins  .  .  .  vagabond,  and  sturdy  beggar.  Lam- 
But  .  .  .  the  senses  appear  to  have  bard's  Eirenarcha,  ed.  1607,  p.  436. 
been  considered  as  belonging  to  one  In  Mitch  Ado,  v.  i.  129,  Claudio 
word,  and  to  have  mutually  influenced  plays  on  drawing  (the  sword)  as  we 
each  other"  (Art'w  E»g.  Diet.}.  Thus  bid  the  minstrels  draw  (/.<•.  the  bow). 
Mercutio' s  play  on  the  meanings  to  52.  'Zounds}  The  F  come  was  sub- 
keep  company  and  to  combine  in  stiuited  in  accordance  with  the  statute 
musical  harmony  falls  in  with  what  against  profanity. 


92  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 

Ben.  We  talk  here  in  the  public  haunt  of  men  : 
Either  withdraw  unto  some  private  place, 
Or  reason  coldly  of  your  grievances,  5  5 

Or  else  depart ;  here  all  eyes  gaze  on  us. 

Mer.   Men's  eyes  were  made  to  look,  and  let  them  gaze ; 
I  will  not  budge  for  no  man's  pleasure,  I. 

Enter  ROMEO. 

Tyb.  Well,  peace  be  with  you,  sir ;  here  comes  my  man. 
Mer.   But  I  '11  be  hang'd,  sir,  if  he  wear  your  livery  :      60 

Marry,  go  before  to  field,  he  '11  be  your  follower ; 

Your  worship  in  that  sense  may  call  him  "  man." 
Tyb.   Romeo,  the  love  I  bear  thee  can  afford 

No  better  term  than  this, — thou  art  a  villain. 
Rom.  Tybalt,  the  reason  that  I  have  to  love  thee          65 

Doth  much  excuse  the  appertaining  rage 

To  such  a  greeting :   villain  am  I  none ; 

Therefore  farewell ;   I  see  thou  know'st  me  not. 
Tyb.  Boy,  this  shall  not  excuse  the  injuries 

That  thou  hast  done  me  ;  therefore  turn  and  draw. 
Rom.   I  do  protest  I  never  injured  thee,  7  I 

But  love  thee  better  than  thou  canst  devise, 

63. 


55.  Or  nason]  O'apell,  followed  by  63.   Iove\  Several  editors  prefer  the 
several  editors,  reads  And  reason  ;  but  unironical  liale  of  Q  i,  and  it  is  true 
the    peace-loving   and    cool   Benvolio  that  Tybalt  is  not  given  to  irony, 
proposes    three    courses     of    action.  66.   excuse]  Perhaps,  accept  an  ex- 
Shakespeare    uses    reason    both     for  cuse  from,  and  remit  or  dispense  with 
debate  and  sf>eak.  the    rage    I    feel,    as    appertaining   to 

56.  depart'}  may  mean  part,  separate,  such  a  greeting.      Perhaps,  however, 
as  in  3  Henry  VI.   11.   vi.   43,  and  in  the  rage   is   Tybalt's  which   Romeo's 
the  Nut- Brown  Maid:   "we  departe  love  excuses.      Collier  (MS.)  has  or- 
not  so  sone. "  ceed. 


SC.  I.] 


ROMEO   AND   JULIET 


Till  thou  shalt  know  the  reason  of  my  love : 
And  so,  good  Capulet,  which  name  I  tender 
As  dearly  as  mine  own,  be  satisfied.  75 

Mcr.   O  calm,  dishonourable,  vile  submission  ! 

Alia  stoccata  carries  it  away.  {Draius, 

Tybalt,  you  rat-catcher,  will  you  walk  ? 

Tyb.  What  wouldst  thou  have  with  me  ? 

J\Icr.   Good   king  of  cats,  nothing  but  one  of  your      80 
nine  lives,  that   I    mean   to  make  bold  withal, 
and,  as   you   shall   use   me   hereafter,   dry-beat 
the  rest  of  the  eight.      Will  you   pluck  your 
sword   out   of  his   pilcher   by  the   cars  ?    make 
haste,    lest    mine    be    about    your    ears    ere    it      85 
be  out. 

Tyb.   I  am  for  you.  [Dr diving. 

Rom,   Gentle  Mercutio,  put  thy  rapier  up. 

Mcr.  Come,  sir,  your  passado.  [They  figJit. 

73-  my\  F.  »«'«<•'  Q-  77-  Alia  stoccata]  Knight ;  Alia  stucatho  O,  !•'  ; 
A  la  stoccata  Capell  and  others  ;  Draws]  Capell.  87.  Drawing]  Kowe. 
89.  They  fight]  Capell. 


77.   stoccata]  defined  by  Florio  "a 
thrust,  a  stoccado,  a  foyne." 

77.  carries  it  away}  carries  the  day, 
as   in   Hamlet,  11.   ii.    377:   "Do  the 
hoys  carry  it  away?"      Leltsom  con- 
jectures   "carry    it    away!"     Clarke 
thinks  Alia  stoccata  is  a  jocose  title 
for  Tybalt. 

78.  rat  -  catt her]  1  jcau.-e    king    of 
cats.      See  note   II. 


Si.    iiint  /ires']   Kc 


r  another  Eliza- 


bethan reference  to  ;  cat's  nine  lives, 
see  Middlcton,  Blu  1,  Matter  Con- 
st able,  IV.  ii. 

82.  dry-heat]  A  blow  that  does  not 
draw  blood  is  a  dry  blow,  but  often 
used  vaguely  for  hard.  Nc:v  l'->t£. 
Diet,  (dry  adj.  12)  quotes  Palsgrave, 
Lesclarcissement,  etc.,  1530.  "  ])lo, 


hie  we  and  grene  coloured,  as  ones  hi  >dic 
is  after  a  dry  stroke."  So  Holland, 
l^lnlarclis  .Morals  (1603),  1 28 1  :  ' '  ]  1  is 
body  ...  is  drie  beaten,  brused  and 
biokcn."  See  iv.  v.  122. 

84.  filfiiei-]  nootherexampleknown 
as  used  here  for  scabbard  ;  probably 
the  same  as  pilch,  a  leather  coat  or 
cloak,  and  hence  applied  to  a  scab- 
bard. Steevcns  quotes  examples  of 
"leather  pilch"  from  Xash,  Pie  ire. 
f\'iiiiitLS<e,  and  Dekker,  Satiroinasti.v-, 
Staunton  conjectures  filch,  sir. 
Singer  (ed.  2)  reads  fid  'her,  but  with- 
out justification.  See  (jiltord's  note 
on  pilcher  in  Jonson,  Poetaster, 
HI.  i. 

89.  passado]  Sec  note  n.  iv.  28. 


94  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 

Rom.  Draw,  Benvolio ;  beat  down  their  weapons.          90 
Gentlemen,  for  shame,  forbear  this  outrage  ! 
Tybalt,  Mercutio,  the  prince  expressly  hath 
Forbid  this  bandying  in  Verona  streets. 
Hold,  Tybalt !   good  Mercutio  ! 

\Exeunt  Tybalt  and  his  Partisans. 

Mer.  I  am  hurt, 

A  plague  o'  both  your  houses  !      I  am  sped.          95 
Is  he  gone,  and  hath  nothing? 

Ben.  What,  art  thou  hurt  ? 

Mer.  Ay,  ay,  a  scratch,  a  scratch  ;  marry,  'tis  enough. 
Where  is  my  page?      Go,  villain,  fetch  a  surgeon. 

\Exit  Page. 

Rom.  Courage,  man ;  the  hurt  cannot  be  much. 

Mer.   No,  'tis  not  so  deep  as   a  well,  nor  so  wide  as    100 
a  church-door ;    but  'tis  enough,  'twill  serve : 
ask  for  me  to-morrow,  and  you   shall  find  me 
a  grave  man.      I   am    peppered,  I  warrant,  for 
this  world. — A  plague  o'  both  your  houses  ! — 
'Zounds  !   a  dog,  a  rat,  a  mouse,  a  cat,  to  scratch    105 
a  man  to  death  !   a  braggart,  a  rogue,  a  villain, 

91.  slianii:,]  Theobald  ;  shame  Q,   E.          93.   Forbid  this]  Q,   Forbid  Qq 
3-5,    Forbidden    E.          94.    Exeunt   .   .    .]  Malone,    Away    Tybalt    Q,    Exit 
Tybalt  I1',   Tibalt  vnrler  Romeos  arme  thrusts  Mercutio,   in  and  flyes  O   i. 
95.   tf  both  your}  Dyce,  a  both  Q,  a  botli  tlic  E,  on  your  O  I.          98.    Exit 
Page]  Capell.          104.  o']  Capell  ;  a  O,  E.          105.   'Zounds]  Q  5,  Sounds  O, 
WhatY. 

92.  Tybalt]   TV  ball  may  belong  to     originated    in    yr    mistaken    for    ye. 
the    preceding    line,     Gentlemen,    as     Many  editors  read  the. 

often,     being    a    disyllabic.       Capell  101.   church  -  door]  Q    I   lias    barnc 

divides  from  Draiu  to  Mercutio  (in  line  door. 

94)  with  the  ending  words  Benvolio,  103.  ^ravc  man]  Compare  John  of 

shame,  Mercutio,  bandying,  Mercutio,  Gaunt's  play  on  his  name,  Richard II. 

and  so  many  editors.  II.  i.  82  :    "  Gaunt  am  I  for  the  grave, 

95.  your  houses]  Grant  White  sug-  gaunt    as    a    grave."      Eor    passages 

gests  that  the  houses  of  F  may  have  found  only  in  C,)  i,  see  p.  184. 


sc.  i.)  ROMEO    AND   JULIET  95 

that  fights  by  the  book  of  arithmetic  ! — Why 
the  devil  came  you  between  us  ?  I  was  hurt 
under  your  arm. 

Rom.   I  thought  all  for  the  best.  i  i  o 

filer.   Help  me  into  some  house,  Benvolio, 

Or    I     shall     faint.        A     plague    o'    both     your 

houses  ! 

They  have  made  worms'  meat  of  me :   I  have  it, 
And  soundly  too  :  your  houses  ! 

{Exeunt  Mercutio  and  Benvolio. 

Rom.  This  gentleman,  the  prince's  near  ally,  i  i  5 

My  very  friend,  hath  got  his  mortal  hurt 
In  my  behalf;   my  reputation  stain'd 
With  Tybalt's  slander, — Tybalt,  that  an  hour 
Hath  been  my  cousin.      O  sweet  Juliet, 
Thy  beauty  hath  made  me  effeminate,  i  20 

And  in  my  temper  soften'd  valour's  steel ! 

Re-enter  BENVOLIO. 

Ben.  O  Romeo,  Romeo,  brave  Mercutio's  dead  ! 
That  gallant  spirit  hath  aspired  the  clouds, 
Which  too  untimely  here  did  scorn  the  earth. 

112.  </]  !•' 4  ;  a  Q,  ]•'.  113,  114.  /  hare  .  .  .  house-}  Dyces  arrange- 
ment;  one  line  O,  F.  114.  soundly  too .-]  Capell  ;  soundly,  to  o  ; 
soundly  to  Qq  3-5,  F  :  soundly  too  F  2  ;  sound!}1  loo,  Ff  3-4.  1 16.  go!  his} 
Qq  3-5,  F  ;  got  this  Q  ;  tane  this  O  i.  1 19.  cousin']  Q,  F  ;  kinsiuan  Q  I 
and  several  editors.  122.  Mercutio' s}  F  2,  Mercutio  is  Q,  Mercutio  s 
is  F. 

107.   arithmetic'}  fights  by  the  rules  117.   refutation}  S.     Walker    con- 

of  the  teachers  of  fencing  ;  compare  jectures  reputation ' s. 

II.  iv.  24:    "one,  two,  and  the  third  123.   aspired}  soar    to,    reach.      So 

in  your  bosom."     Is  it  in  this  sense  of  Marlowe,  Tamburlainc  :   "And  both 

studying   rule    and    theory   that    lago  our  souls  aspire  celestial  thrones."' 
calls  Cassio  (who  never  set  a  squadron 
in  the  field)  a  "  great  arithmetician  "  ? 


96  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 

Rom.  This     day's     black     fate      on     more     days     doth 
depend ;  125 

This  but  begins  the  woe  others  must  end. 

Re-enter  TYBALT. 

Ben.   Here  comes  the  furious  Tybalt  back  again. 

Rom.   Alive,  in  triumph  !    and  Mercutio  slain  ! 
Away  to  heaven,  respective  lenity, 
And  fire-eyed  fury  be  my  conduct  now! —          130 
Now,  Tybalt,  take  the  "  villain  "  back  again 
That  late  thou  gavest  me  !  for  Mercutio's  soul 
Is  but  a  little  way  above  our  heads, 
Staying  for  thine  to  keep  him  company : 
Either  thou,  or  I,  or  both,  must  go  with  him.       135 

Tyb.   Thou,  wretched  boy,  that  didst  consort  him  here, 
Shalt  with  him  hence. 

Rom.  This  shall  determine  that. 

[  77^7  fight ;    Tybalt  falls. 

Ben.   Romeo,  away  !   be  gone  ! 

The  citizens  are  up,  and  Tybalt  slain  : 
Stand    not    amazed :     the    prince    will    doom    thee 
death  ,  140 

If  thou  art  taken  :   hence!   begone!   away! 

125.    more}  O  1,05;   uio  O,  F.  126.    licgins  the  •woe}  O  5  ;  begins,  the 

ii<o  Q,  K;  hcgins  the  woe,  F  4.  128.  Alive,  in  triumph!]  Dyce,  Alive  in 
triumph  O  i,  He  gan  in  triumph  O  (gon  Oq  4,  5),  He  gon  in  triumph,  F. 
130.  fire-eyed]  O  I,  fie  rend  Q,ftre  and  F.  135.  Either}  Q,  F;  OrQi. 

125.   depend}  han^  down,  impend  ;  siderate,  as  in  Merchant  of  Venice,  v. 

as  in  Troilus  atid  Cressida,  n.  iii.  21  :  i.  156. 

"  the  curse  depending  [F,  dependant]  130.   conduct}  conductor,    as  in   v. 

on  those  that  war  for  a  placket."  iii.  116. 

128.  Alive}  Capell    reads    Again?  136.  consort']    accompany,     attend, 
in  triumph?  as  in  Love's  Labour's  Lost,  n.   i.  178. 

129.  respective}      regardful,      con-  140.  amazed}    confounded,    stupe- 

fied, as  often  in  Shakespeare. 


sc.  i.]  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  97 

Rom.   O,  I  am  fortune's  fool ! 

Ben.  Why  dost  thou  stay  ? 

{Exit  Romeo. 

Enter  Citizens,  etc. 

First  Cit.  Which  way  ran  he  that  kill'd  Mercutio  ? 

Tybalt,  that  murderer,  which  way  ran  he  ? 
Ben.  There  lies  that  Tybalt. 
First  Cit.  Up,  sir,  go  with  me  ;    145 

I  charge  thee  in  the  prince's  name,  obey. 

Enter  PRINCE,  attended ;   MONTAGUE,  CAPULET, 
their  Wives,  and  others. 

Prince.  Where  are  the  vile  beginners  of  this  fray  ? 

Ben.  O  noble  prince,  I  can  discover  all 

The  unlucky  manage  of  this  fatal  brawl : 

There  lies  the  man,  slain  by  young  Romeo,         150 

That  slew  thy  kinsman,  brave  Mercutio. 

Lady  Cap.   Tybalt,  my  cousin  !    O  my  brother's  child  ! 

O    prince !    O    cousin !   husband !    O,    the  blood   is 

spill'd 
Of  my  dear  kinsman  ! — Prince,  as  thou  art  true, 

143.  First  Cit.]  Malone  ;  Citti  Q,  F.  146.  Enter  .  .  .  ]  Capell  sub- 
stantially ;  Enter  Prince,  olde  Mountague,  Capulet,  their  wives  and  all  Q, 
F.  148.  all}  Q  i,  F;  all:  Q.  153.  O  prince  .  .  0]  Q,  F;  Vnhafpie 
sight '  Ah  ()  i  ;  Unhappy  sight!  alas  Pope,  Malone  (with  ah  me,  for 
alas). 

142.  fortune 's  fool}    the    sport    or  148.   discover]  reveal,   as  in   II.   ii. 

mock  of  fortune  ;  so  ''  fools  of  nature  "  106. 

in  Hamlet,  \.  iv.  54.     Johnson  sees  a  149.    manage}  conduct, 

reference  to  fools  of  the  drama:    ;l  I  153.   cousin}      Dyce's      suggestion 

am  always  running  in  the  way  of  evil  that    cousin    was    here    caught    from 

fortune  like  the  Fool  in  the  play.'1   Qi  the  line  above  and   inserted  erronc- 

has  "  fortunes  slave.''  ously  by   the    printer    may  be   right. 

Several  editors  omit  cousin. 


98  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACTHI. 

For  blood  of  ours,  shed  blood  of  Montague.         i  5  5 
O  cousin,  cousin  ! 

Prince.  Benvolio,  who  began  this  bloody  fray  ? 

Ben.  Tybalt,  here  slain,  whom  Romeo's  hand  did  slay : 
Romeo,  that  spoke  him  fair,  bid  him  bethink 
How  nice  the  quarrel  was,  and  urged  withal        1 60 
Your  high  displeasure :   all  this  uttered 
With  gentle  breath,  calm  look,  knees  humbly  bow'd, 
Could  not  take  truce  with  the  unruly  spleen 
Of  Tybalt  deaf  to  peace,  but  that  he  tilts 
With  piercing  steel  at  bold  Mercutio's  breast  ;     165 
Who,  all  as  hot,  turns  deadly  point  to  point, 
And,  with  a  martial  scorn,  with  one  hand  beats 
Cold  death  aside,  and  with  the  other  sends 
It  back  to  Tybalt,  whose  dexterity 
Retorts  it:   Romeo  he  cries  aloud,  170 

"  Hold,  friends  !   friends,  part !  "  and,  swifter  than  his 

tongue, 

His  agile  arm  beats  down  their  fatal  points, 
And  'twixt  them  rushes ;  underneath  whose  arm 
An  envious  thrust  from  Tybalt  hit  the  life 
Of  stout  Mercutio,  and  then  Tybalt  fled;  175 

But  by  and  by  comes  back  to  Romeo, 
WTho  had  but  newly  entertain'd  revenge, 
And  to  't  they  go  like  lightning ;  for,  ere  I 

157.   bloody^}  Q,  omitted  F.          159.   bid'}  Q,    F;  bad  Q  5.          172.   agile} 
Q  i,  Qq  4,  5  ;  aged  Q,  F  ;  able  Ff  2-4. 

160.   nice}  unduly  minute,   trivial  ;          170.    Retorts     it}      Collier     (MS.) 

as  in  v.  ii.  18.  adds  the  word  home. 

163.   take  truce}  Capell  conjectured          174.   envious}  malicious,  as  often  in 

make  truce  ;  but  the  words  of  the  text  Shakespeare. 

occur  in    Venus  and  Adonis,  line  82,          176.   by  and  by}  immediately,  as  in 

and  King  John,  m.  i.  17.  II.  ii.  151. 


sc.i.]  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  99 

Could  draw  to  part  them,  was  stout  Tybalt  slain  ; 
And  as  he  fell,  did  Romeo  turn  and  fly:  180 

This  is  the  truth  or  let  Benvolio  die. 

Lady  Cap.   He  is  a  kinsman  to  the  Montague, 

Affection  makes  him  false,  he  speaks  not  true  : 
Some  twenty  of  them  fought  in  this  black  strife, 
And  all  those  twenty  could  but  kill  one  life.        185 
I  beg  for  justice,  which  thou,  prince,  must  give  ; 
Romeo  slew  Tybalt,  Romeo  must  not  live. 

Prince.   Romeo  slew  him,  he  slew  Mercutio ; 

Who  now  the  price  of  his  dear  blood  doth  owe  ? 

Mon.   Not  Romeo,  prince,  he  was  Mercutio's  friend  ;  1 90 
His  fault  concludes  but  what  the  law  should  end, 
The  life  of  Tybalt. 

Prince.  And  for  that  offence 

Immediately  we  do  exile  him  hence: 
I  have  an  interest  in  your  hate's  proceeding, 
My    blood     for     your     rude     brawls     doth    lie    a  - 
bleeding;  195 

But  I  '11  amerce  you  with  so  strong  a  fine 
That  you  shall  all  repent  the  loss  of  mine : 
I  will  be  deaf  to  pleading  and  excuses ; 
Nor  tears  nor  prayers  shall  purchase  out  abuses  ; 

189.  owe?]  Theobald  ;  owe  Q,  F.          190.  Mon.]  Oq  4,  5  ;  Capu.  Q  ;  Cap. 
Q3,  F.          194.   hate's]  Knight  ;  hates  Q  I  ;  heartsQ,  F.          198.  IwilF\Q  i, 
Qq  4,  5,  F  2  ;  //  will  Q,  F.          199.  out]  Q,  our  F ',  for  Q  I. 

190.  Mon.]  Rowe  here,  emending          197.   of   mine}    perhaps     "of    my 
F  Cap.,  assigns  the  speech  to  Lady     blood'';    perhaps    only    "my    loss." 
Cap.    Theobald    assigns    it    to    Lady     Allen  conjectures  this  loss. 

Mont.  iijS.    /   will]    Mommsen    reads    It 

194.  hate's]    Ilanmer  reads   heats',  uiilt  with  Q,  F,  it  referring  to  blood. 
Johnson  (from  (,),  F)  hearts' .  199.  purchase  out]    So    buy  out  in 

195.  My   blood]    because   Mercutio  HamUt.  III.  iii.  60. 
was  his  kinsman. 


100  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 

Therefore  use  none  :  let  Romeo  hence  in  haste,   200 
Else,  when  he  's  found,  that  hour  is  his  last. 
Bear  hence  this  body  and  attend  our  will : 
Mercy  but  murders,  pardoning  those  that  kill. 

{Exeunt. 

SCENE  II. —  The  Same,      Capulefs  Orchard. 

Enter  JULIET. 

Jul.   Gallop  apace,  you  fiery-footed  steeds, 

Towards  Phoebus'  lodging :  such  a  waggoner 
As  Phaethon  would  whip  you  to  the  west, 
And  bring  in  cloudy  night  immediately. 
Spread  thy  close  curtain,  love-performing  night,       5 
That  runaway's  eyes  may  wink,  and  Romeo 
Leap  to  these  arms,  untalk'd  of  and  unseen. 
Lovers  can  see  to  do  their  amorous  rites 
By  their  own  beauties  ;   or,  if  love  be  blind, 

201.  he's]  Theobald  ;  he  is  Q,  F.         203.   but'}  Q,  not  V. 

Scene  ii. 

Capulet's  Orchard]  Globe  ed.,  Capulet's  garden  Capell,  An  apartment  in 
Capulet's  house  Rowe,  Juliet's  apartment  G.  White.  2.  7'oivards]  Q,  F  ; 
To  Q  I  ;  lodging}  Q,  F  ;  mansion  Q  I.  6.  runaway's}  runnawayes  Qq  2, 
3  ;  run-aivaycs  Qq  4,  5,  F  ;  run-a-maies  Ff  2,  3  ;  run-aivays  F  4.  7. 

unseen.]  Rowe  ;  unscene,  O,  F  ;  ttnseene :  Q  5.          8.   rites]  F  4  ;  rights  Q,  F. 
9-   •/>>]  Qq  4.  5.  Ff  2-4  ;  And  by  Q,  F. 

I.    Gallop  apace}  Malone  :  "Shake-  So     in     Barnabe    Riche's     Farewell, 

speare    probably    remembered    Mar-  1583:    '  The  day  to  his  seeming  passed 

Knve's  Edward  II.  iv.  iii.  :  away  so  slowely  that  he  had  thought 

'  Gallop     apace,      bright      Phoebus,  the  stately  steedes  had  bin  tired  that 

through  the  sky,  drawe  the  chariot  of  the  Sunne,  and 

And    dusky    night,    in    rusty    iron  wished  that  Phaeton  had  beene  there 

car,  with  a  whippe.'" 

Between    you     both     shorten    the         6.   runaway1  s\  See  Appendix   III. 

time.'  p.  197. 


sc.  ii.]          ROMEO   AND   JULIET  101 

It  best  agrees  with  night.      Come,  civil  night,        10 
Thou  sober-suited  matron,  all  in  black, 
And  learn  me  how  to  lose  a  winning  match, 
Play'd  for  a  pair  of  stainless  maidenhoods  : 
Hood  my  unmann'd  blood,  bating  in  my  cheeks, 
With    thy  black    mantle,  till    strange    love    grown 

bold  1 5 

Think  true  love  acted  simple  modesty. 
Come,    night,    come,    Romeo,    come,   thou    day    in 

night ; 

For  thou  wilt  lie  upon  the  wings  of  night 
Whiter  than  new  snow  on  a  raven's  back. 
Come,  gentle  night,  come,  loving,  black  -  brow'd 

night,  20 

Give  me  my  Romeo  ;  and,  when  he  shall  die, 
Take  him  and  cut  him  out  in  little  stars, 
And  he  will  make  the  face  of  heaven  so  fine 
That  all  the  world  will  be  in  love  with  night, 
And  pay  no  worship  to  the  garish  sun.  25 

11.  sober- suited}  hyphen  F  4.          15.  grown]  Rowe  ;  grow  Q,   F.          19. 
neui  snow  on]  F  2;  new  snow  upon  Q,  F;  snow  upon  Qq  4,  5.          21.   he] 
Qq4,  5;  7Q,  F. 

10.  c ivil\  grave, sober,  as  in  Dekker,  15.  strange"}  reserved,  as  in  11.  ii. 

Seven     Sinnes     of    London,     i.    (ed.  101. 

Arber,  13),  "in  lookes,  grave;  in  attire,  21.   -when     he    shall    die"}     Delius 

civill."  prefers  the  /of  Q,  F,  perhaps  rightly. 

12.  leans']     teach;      as     often     in  Juliet,    he    says,     demands    life-long 
Shakespeare.  possession    of    her    lover ;    afier    her 

14.    Hood     my    tinmaniid     blood,  death,   Night    shall    be    her    heiress  : 

bating]  Falconry  terms  ;    unmanned,  "  of  the  possibility  of  Romeo's  death 

not  sufficiently  trained  to  be  familiar  she  cannot,  in  her  present  happiness, 

with  the  keeper  ;    bating,   fluttering  ;  conceive." 

the  bird  was  hooded  on  fist  or  perch         25  garish']  excessively  bright,  glar- 

to  check  the  bating  (French,  se  bait  re},  ing.       Johnson:     "Milton    had    this 

There  is  probably  a  pun  here  on  the  speech  in  his  thoughts  when  he  wrote 

word  unmann'd.     See  Henry  V.  ill.  ...    in    //  Pcnscroso  :    '  Till    civil- 

vii.    121,    122.    and    Taming  of   the  suited  morn  appear,'  and   '  Hide  me 

Shrew,  iv.  i.  206-209.  from  day's  garish  eye.''" 


102  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACTIH. 

O,  I  have  bought  the  mansion  of  a  love, 
But  not  possess'd  it,  and  though  I  am  sold, 
Not  yet  enjoy'd  ;  so  tedious  is  this  day 
As  is  the  night  before  some  festival 
To  an  impatient  child  that  hath  new  robes  30 

And    may  not  wear    them. — O,    here    comes    my 
nurse, 

Enter  Nurse,  with  cords. 

And  she  brings  news,  and  every  tongue  that  speaks 
But  Romeo's  name  speaks  heavenly  eloquence. — 
Now,  nurse,  what  news  ?      What  hast  thou  there  ? 

the  cords 
That  Romeo  bid  thee  fetch  ? 

Nurse.  Ay,  ay,  the  cords.      35 

[  Throws  them  down. 

Jul.  Ay    me!    what    news?    why    dost   thou    wring   thy 
hands  ? 

Nurse.  Ah,  well-a-day !   he's  dead,  he's  dead,  he's  dead. 
We  are  undone,  lady,  we  are  undone. 
Alack  the  day  ! — he's  gone,  he's  kill'd,  he  's  dead  ! 

Jul.  Can  heaven  be  so  envious  ? 

Nurse.  Romeo  can,  40 

Though  heaven  cannot.      O,  Romeo,  Romeo  ! — 
Who  ever  would  have  thought  it  ? — Romeo  ! 

Jul.  What  devil  art  thou  that  dost  torment  me  thus  ? 
This  torture  should  be  roar'd  in  dismal  hell. 

31.  Enter  Nurse]  O,  F;  after  line  33  Dyce,  Cambridge.  34.  there  ?]  F, 
there.,  Q.  35.  Throws  .  .  .]  Capell  substantially.  37.  Ah~\  I'ope  ;  A 
Q,  F  ;  he 's  dead}  thrice  (as  here)  Q,  twice  F. 

40.  envious}  malicious. 


sc.  n.j          ROMEO   AND   JULIET  103 

Hath  Romeo  slain  himself?  say  thou  but  "  I,"     45 

And  that  bare  vowel  "  I  "  shall  poison  more 

Than  the  death-darting  eye  of  cockatrice  : 

I  am  not  I,  if  there  be  such  an  "  I," 

Or  those  eyes  shut  that  make  thee  answer  "  I." 

If  he  be  slain  say  "  I  "  ;   or  if  not,  no  :  50 

Brief  sounds  determine  of  my  weal  or  woe. 

Nurse.   I  saw  the  wound,  I  saw  it  with  mine  eyes, — 
God  save  the  mark  ! — here  on  his  manly  breast: 
A  piteous  corse,  a  bloody  piteous  corse  ; 
Pale,  pale  as  ashes,  all  bedaub'd  in  blood,  5  5 

All  in  gore  blood  ;   I  swounded  at  the  sight. 

ful.   O,  break,  my  heart !  poor  bankrupt,  break  at  once  ! 
To  prison,  eyes,  ne'er  look  on  liberty  ! 
Vile  earth,  to  earth  resign,  end  motion  here, 

48.  an  "/,"]  Q  5  (/)  ;  an  I.  Q,  F.  49.  shut]  Capell ;  shot  Q,  F  ;  make] 
Steevcns  (Johnson  conject.) ;  makes  Q,  F.  51.  Brief  sounds'}  Q  5  ;  Briefc, 
sounds,  Q,  F;  of]  F,  Q  5  ;  omitted  Q  ;  or  Collier  (MS.)- 

45.    "7"]ay;  commonly  printed  I  suggested    that    it   was    originally   a 

in    Shakespeare's   time.      A   modern  bowman's   exclamation:     "May   the 

editor  is  compelled  here  to  retain  the  mark  escape  rival  shooters  !  " 
old  form,   or  to  obscure  the  play  on         56.  gore  blood}  clotted  blood.    Halli- 

/  =  ay,  /,  the  vowel,  and  eye.  well    quotes    Vicars,     Virgil,    1632  : 

47.  cockatrice]    The    power    of  the  "  vented  much  black  gore-blood." 
fabled     cockatrice     (often     identified         56.   swounded]    The    forms    swoon, 
with  basilisk)  to  slay  with  the  eye  is  sivoiind,  sounds.iQ  all  common  inEliza- 
spoken  of  in  Richard  III.   iv.   i.  56,  bethan  books. 

and  Twelfth  Night,  m.  iv.  215.     For  57-6o.    0  break  .   .   .  bier]  In  place 

etymology   and   sense-history   of  the  of  these  lines  Q  I  has  : 

word,  see  a  long  article  in  New  Eng.  "Ah,  Romeo,  Romeo,  what  disaster 

Diet.     See  Topsell,  History  of  Ser-  hap 

penis   (ed.    1658),   pp.    677-681,   and  Hath  severd  thee  from   thy  true 

Browne,  Pseudodoxia  Epidemica.  Juliet  ? 

48.  "/"]    Many    editors    print    /,  Ah  why  should  Heaven  so  much 
without  inverted  commas.  conspire  with  Woe, 

49.  those  eyes}  Romeo's  eyes.  Or      Fate      envie      our      happie 
51.   determine    of}    decide,    as    in  Marriage, 

Richard  III.  III.  iv.  2.  So  soone  to  sunder  us  by  time- 

53.   mark}  The  origin  of  the  ejacu-  lesse  Death?" 

lation    is    uncertain.       It    has   been 


104  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 

And  thou  and  Romeo  press  one  heavy  bier !         60 
Nurse.   O  Tybalt,  Tybalt,  the  best  friend  I  had  ! 

O  courteous  Tybalt !  honest  gentleman  ! 

That  ever  I  should  live  to  see  thee  dead  ! 
Jul.  What  storm  is  this  that  blows  so  contrary? 

Is  Romeo  slaughter'd,  and  is  Tybalt  dead?  65 

My  dearest  cousin,  and  my  dearer  lord  ? 

Then,  dreadful  trumpet,  sound  the  general  doom  ! 

For  who  is  living  if  those  two  are  gone  ? 
Nurse.  Tybalt  is  gone,  and  Romeo  banished  ; 

Romeo,  that  kill'd  him,  he  is  banished.  70 

Jul.    O    God !  —  did     Romeo's      hand     shed     Tybalt's 

blood  ? 

Nurse.   It  did,  it  did  ;  alas  the  day,  it  did ! 
Jul.  O  serpent  heart,  hid  with  a  flowering  face  ! 

Did  ever  dragon  keep  so  fair  a  cave  ? 

Beautiful  tyrant !   fiend  angelical !  75 

Dove-feather'd  raven  !   wolvish-ravening  lamb  ! 

Despised  substance  of  divinest  show  ! 

Just  opposite  to  what  thou  justly  seem'st ; 

A  damned  saint,  an  honourable  villain  ! 

O  nature,  what  hadst  thou  to  do  in  hell  80 

60.   one]  Q  4  ;  on  Q,    F.  66.   dearest}  Q,   F  ;  dear-loved  Q  I.  67. 

dreadful  trumpet,}  Q,  F  ;  let  the  trumpet  Q  I.  69.  gone}  Q,  F  ;  dead  Q  I. 
72.  Nurse]  Q  i,  Q  5  ;  omitted  Q,  F.  73,  74.  Jul.  O  .  .  .  Did}  F  2,  Q  5  ; 
Nur.  O  .  .  .  face!  Jul.  Did,  Q.  F.  76.  Dove-feather'd  raven}  Theobald; 
Ravenous  dovef eat  herd  Raven  Q,  F  ;  Ravenous  dove,  feat  h  red  Raven  Qq  4,5) 
F  2.  79.  damned]  Qq  4,  5,  F  2  ;  dimme  Q  ;  dimne  F. 

66.   dearest}  More  force  is  given  by  75.   Beautiful}     Daniel      proposes 

this    reading    to    the    dearer    which  Bountiful,    to    strengthen    the    anti- 

follows  than  if  dear-loved  Q   I    were  thesis, 

read.  78.  Just  .   .   .  justly}   Exact    .    .   . 

73.    0  serpent}  So    Macbeth,   I.    v.  exactly,  as  often  in  Shakespeare. 
66:   "look  like  the  innocent  flower, 
But  be  the  serpent  under 't." 


SC.H.]          ROMEO   AND   JULIET  105 

When  thou  didst  bower  the  spirit  of  a  fiend 

In  mortal  paradise  of  such  sweet  flesh  ? 

Was  ever  book  containing  such  vile  matter 

So  fairly  bound  ?      O,  that  deceit  should  dwell 

In  such  a  gorgeous  palace  ! 
Nurse.  There  's  no  trust,     8  5 

No  faith,  no  honesty  in  men  ;  all  perjured, 

All  forsworn,  all  naught,  all  dissemblers. 

Ah,  where 's  my  man?  give  me  some  aqua  vita: 

These  griefs,  these  woes,  these  sorrows    make  me 
old. 

Shame  come  to  Romeo  ! 
Jul.  Blister'd  be  thy  tongue      90 

For  such  a  wish  !   he  was  not  born  to  shame : 

Upon  his  brow  shame  is  ashamed  to  sit ; 

For  'tis  a  throne  where  honour  may  be  crown'd 

Sole  monarch  of  the  universal  earth. 

O,  what  a  beast  was  I  to  chide  at  him  !  95 

Nurse.  Will    you    speak    well    of    him    that    kill'd    your 

cousin  ? 
Jul.  Shall  I  speak  ill  of  him  that  is  my  husband  ? 

Ah,  poor  my  lord,  what  tongue  shall  smooth  thy 
name, 

When  I,  thy  three-hours'  wife,  have  mangled  it? 

81.   bower]  Q,  F  ;  power  Q  4  ;  pours  Q  5.         95.  at  ki»i]  Q,  him  F. 

87.  All  .  .  .  dissemblers]  With  the  dissemblers,  the  first  ending  men.  The 
emphasis  three  times  on  all,  and  for-  above  is  Capell's  arrangement. 
sworn  pronounced  as  a  trisyllable,  the  98.  smooth]  With  the  literal  mean- 
line  reads  well  enough.  Daniel  (after  ing  opposed  to  mangle,  and  the 
Fleay)  reads  :  metaphorical  meaning  speak  well  of, 
"all  naught,  fatter,  as  in  Julius  Andronicus,  v.  ii. 
All  perjured,  all  dissemblers,  all  for-  140:  '•''smooth,  and  speak  him  fair." 

sworn."  The  idea  is  from  Brooke's  poem. 
Q,  F  make  two  lines  from  7 here  's  to 


106  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACTHI. 

But,     wherefore,      villain,     didst      thou      kill      my 
cousin?  100 

That  villain  cousin  would  have  kill'd  my  husband  : 
Back,  foolish  tears,  back  to  your  native  spring; 
Your  tributary  drops  belong  to  woe, 
Which  you,  mistaking,  offer  up  to  joy. 
My  husband  lives,  that  Tybalt  would  have  slain ;    105 
And  Tybalt's  dead,  that  would  have  slain  my  hus- 
band : 

All  this  is  comfort ;  wherefore  weep  I  then  ? 
Some  word  there  was,  worser  than  Tybalt's  death, 
That  murder'd  me :   I  would  forget  it  fain  ; 
But,  O,  it  presses  to  my  memory,  I  10 

Like  damned  guilty  deeds  to  sinners'  minds : 
"  Tybalt  is  dead,  and  Romeo — banished  !  " 
That  "  banished,"  that  one  word  "  banished," 
Hath  slain  ten  thousand  Tybalts.      Tybalt's  death 
Was  woe  enough,  if  it  had  ended  there :  115 

Or,  if  sour  woe  delights  in  fellowship 
And  needly  will  be  rank'd  with  other  griefs, 
Why  follow'd  not,  when  she  said  "  Tybalt 's  dead," 
Thy  father,  or  thy  mother,  nay,  or  both, 
Which  modern  lamentation  might  have  moved?    120 
But  with  a  rearward  following  Tybalt's  death, 

106.    Tybalt's}  Q,  Tybalt  F.          108.  word}  Q,  words  F.          121.   with}  Q, 
•which  F. 

117-    needly}  needs  ;  used  only  here  rear-word.       But    compare    Sonnets, 

by  Shakespeare.  xc.  6  : 

120.  modern}    ordinary,    common,          "  Ah,  do  not,  when  my  heart  hath 
as  in  All  '5  Well,  II.  iii.  2,  and  As  You  scaped  this  sorrow, 

Like  It,   II.   vi.    156,  and  often  else-  Come  in  the  rearward  of  a  con- 

where,  quer'd  woe.'' 

121.  reanuard}    Collier    proposed     And  "the  reanuard  of  reproaches," 

Much  Ado,  iv.  i.  128. 


sc.  ii.]  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  107 

"  Romeo  is  banished  "  :  to  speak  that  word, 

Is  father,  mother,  Tybalt,  Romeo,  Juliet, 

All  slain,  all  dead  :  "  Romeo  is  banished  !  " 

There  is  no  end,  no  limit,  measure,  bound,  125 

In    that    word's    death;     no    words    can    that    woe 

sound. 

Where  is  my  father  and  my  mother,  nurse  ? 
Nurse.  Weeping  and  wailing  over  Tybalt's  corse : 

Will  you  go  to  them  ?      I  will  bring  you  thither. 
Jul.  Wash  they  his  wounds   with  tears :    mine  shall   be 
spent,  1 30 

When  theirs  are  dry,  for  Romeo's  banishment. 
Take     up     those     cords  :      poor     ropes,     you     are 

beguiled, 

Both  you  and  I,  for  Romeo  is  exiled  : 
He  made  you  for  a  highway  to  my  bed, 
But  I,  a  maid,  die  maiden-widowed.  135 

Come,   cords ;    come,    nurse ;    I  '11    to   my  wedding- 
bed  ; 

And  death,  not  Romeo,  take  my  maidenhead  ! 
Nurse.   Hie  to  your  chamber  :   I  '11  find  Romeo 
To  comfort  you  :    I  wot  well  where  he  is. 
Hark  ye,  your  Romeo  will  be  here  at  night:        140 
I  '11  to  him  ;   he  is  hid  at  Laurence'  cell. 
Jul.   O,  find  him  !   give  this  ring  to  my  true  knight, 
And  bid  him  come  to  take  his  last  farewell. 

\Exeunt, 

130.  tears-]  Qq  3,  4,   F;  teares  ?  O.  135.   maiden-widowed}  hyphen 

Rowe.          136.  cords]  Q,  cordY. 

126.   sound]  make  audible;  but  to          130.   tears:]  Several  editors  prefer 
sound  as  with  a  plummet  is  possible.       the  tears  ?  of  O. 


108  ROMEO    AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 


SCENE  III. —  The  Same.     Friar  Laurence's  cell. 

Enter  Friar  LAURENCE. 

Fri,  Romeo,  come  forth ;  come  forth,  thou  fearful  man  : 
Affliction  is  enamour'd  of  thy  parts, 
And  thou  art  wedded  to  calamity. 

Enter  ROMEO. 

Rom.   Father,  what  news  ?   what  is  the  prince's  doom  ? 

What  sorrow  craves  acquaintance  at  my  hand,        5 

That  I  yet  know  not  ? 
Fri.  Too  familiar 

Is  my  dear  son  with  such  sour  company : 

I  bring  thee  tidings  of  the  prince's  doom. 
Rom.  What  less  than  dooms-day  is  the  prince's  doom  ? 
Fri.  A  gentler  judgment  vanish'd  from  his  lips,  10 

Not  body's  death,  but  body's  banishment. 
Rom.   Ha,  banishment !   be  merciful,  say  "  death  "  ; 

For  exile  hath  more  terror  in  his  look, 

Much  more  than  death  :  do  not  say  "  banishment." 

Friar  Laurence's  cell]  Capell.  Enter  Friar  Laurence]  Capell ;  Enter  Frier 
Q  I  ;  Enter  Frier  and  Romeo  O,  F.  4.  Enter  Romeo]  Q  i,  Dyce  ;  after 
line  I  Capell.  14.  Much  .  .  .  death}  Q,  F  ;  Than  death  it  selfe  Q  i. 

Enter  .   .   .]    Friar    Laurence    has  in  The  Renegade,  v.  Hi.,  has  :   "Upon 

come  from  without ;  Romeo  is  hidden  those   lips    from    which   those   sweet 

within  ;  hence  the  directions  of  Q   I  words    vanish 'if,"    which    Keightley 

seem  right.  supposes  was  written  on  the  authority 

1.  fearful\  full  of  fear,  as  often  in  of  the  present  passage.      Heath  con- 
Shakespeare,  jectured  issued.    I  suspect  that  banish- 

2.  parts]  gifts,   endowments,  as  in  mcnt    in    the    next    line    misled    the 
III.  V.  182.  printer;  but  possibly  (and  it  is  strange 

10.   vanished]  Xo  such  use  of  vanish  that    this    has    not    been   suggested) 

is  found   elsewhere    in    Shakespeare,  Shakespeare  wrote  : 

for    breath    vanishing    from    the    lips  "  A  gentler  judgment— '  banish'd  ' — 
like  smoke  (in  Lucrece,  line  1041)  is  from  his  lips." 

not  a  parallel.      Massinger,  however, 


SC.HI.]         ROMEO   AND   JULIET  109 

Fri.   Hence  from  Verona  art  thou  banished  :  i  5 

Be  patient,  for  the  world  is  broad  and  wide. 

Ron.  There  is  no  world  without  Verona  walls, 
But  purgatory,  torture,  hell  itself. 
Hence  banished  is  banish'd  from  the  world, 
And  world's  exile  is  death  ;  then  "  banished  "        20 
Is  death  mis-term'd  :  calling  death  "  banished," 
Thou  cutt'st  my  head  off  with  a  golden  axe, 
And  smilest  upon  the  stroke  that  murders  me. 

Fri.  O  deadly  sin  !      O  rude  unthankfulness  ! 

Thy    fault    our    law    calls    death ;     but     the    kind 
prince,  25 

Taking  thy  part,  hath  rush'd  aside  the  law, 
And  turn'd  that  black  word  death  to  banishment : 
This  is  dear  mercy,  and  thou  seest  it  not. 

Rom.  'Tis  torture,  and  not  mercy :  heaven  is  here, 

Where  Juliet  lives  ;  and  every  cat  and  dog  30 

And  little  mouse,  every  unworthy  thing, 

Live  here  in  heaven  and  may  look  on  her, 

But  Romeo  may  not :  more  validity, 

More  honourable  state,  more  courtship  lives 

In  carrion  flies  than  Romeo  :  they  may  seize        3  5 

15.  Hence]  Q  i  ;  Here  Q,  F.  20.  world's  exile]  Q,  F;  world  exilde 
Q  i;  world-exiTd  Pope.  21.  "banished"]  Q,  F;  banishment  Q  I. 
28.  dear]  Q,  F;  meere  Q  I. 

20.  exile']  The  accent  is  variable;  83:    "this    ample   third   of  our    fair 

see  line  13  and  line  43.  kingdom,  No  less  in  space,  validity, 

26.   rush'd~]      Capell      conjectured  and  pleasure." 

push'd;    Collier    (MS.)    has    brush'd.  34.   courtship]    Schmidt    compares 

Schmidt    explains    rusA'd    aside     as  As    You    Like  Jt,    ill.    ii.    364:   "an 

eluded,      comparing      Measure      for  inland  man,  one  that  knew  courtship 

Measure,  I.  iv.  63  :    "  have  run  by  the  well,    for    there    he  fell   in   love,"    as 

hideous  law."  another  example  of  the  word  with  the 

33.   validity']    worth,    value,    as    in  two   meanings  of  civility,  courtliness 

All's  Well,  \.  iii.  192,  and  Lear,  I.  i.  and  courting,  wooing,  blent  into  one. 


110  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 

On  the  white  wonder  of  dear  Juliet's  hand, 
And  steal  immortal  blessing  from  her  lips, 
Who,  even  in  pure  and  vestal  modesty, 
Still  blush,  as  thinking  their  own  kisses  sin  ; 
But  Romeo  may  not ;  he  is  banished  :  40 

This  may  flies  do,  when  I  from  this  must  fly : 
They  are  free  men,  but  I  am  banished  : 
And  say'st  thou  yet  that  exile  is  not  death  ? 
Hadst  thou  no  poison  mix'd,  no  sharp-ground  knife, 
No  sudden  mean  of  death,  though  ne'er  so  mean,     45 
But  "  banished  "  to  kill  me  ? — "  Banished  "  ? 
O  friar,  the  damned  use  that  word  in  hell ; 
Howling  attends  it :  how  hast  thou  the  heart, 
Being  a  divine,  a  ghostly  confessor, 
A  sin-absolver,  and  my  friend  profess'd,  50 

To  mangle  me  with  that  word  "  banished  "  ? 
Fri.   Thou  fond  mad  man,  hear  me  a  little  speak. 

40-43.  But  .  .  .  death?]  see  note  below.  48.  Howling  attends]  Q  i, 
Q  ;  Howlings  attends  F.  51.  "  banished"}  Q,  F  ;  banishment  Q  I.  52. 
Thou]  Q  i,  Qq  4,  5  ;  Then  Q,  F;  hear  me  a  little  speak]  Q,  heare  me 
speake  F,  heare  me  but  speake  a  word  Q  I. 

40-43.  But  ,  .   .  death .']  Q  i  has :  text.     For  the  various  arrangements 

"  And  steale   immortal!  kisses   from  of  editors,  see  Furness. 

her  lips  ;  45.    mean    of   death]    Shakespeare 

But  Romeo  may  not,  he  is  banished,  uses  both  the  singular  mean  and  the 

Flies  may  doo  this,  but  I  from  this  plural  means. 

must  flye.  48.   Howling]  To  howl  is  used  by 

Oh   Father  hadst    thou    no    strong  Shakespeare  several  times  with  special 

poyson  mixt."  reference  to  the  outcries  of  the  damned, 

Q  places  after  line  39  of  text  lines  41,  as  in  2  Henry  II'.   n.   iv.   374,   and 

43,  40,  and  then  adds  the  line  "  Flies  Hamlet,  \ .  i.  265. 

may,"  etc.,  of  Q  i,  which  is  followed  52.  fond}  foolish, 

by  42  of  the  text.      F  gives  only  line  52.   hear  .   .   .    speak]     G.     White 

41   of  the  text,   followed   by   43,    40.  justly    remarks    that,    although    most 

Frrors  were  made   in   printing   a   re-  editors    follow    Q    I,    "hear  me    but 

vision  based  on  Q  I.      See  the  note  in  speak    a    word,"    the    change    seems 

Daniel's   edition   in    explanation  and  plainly  to  have  been  made  to  avoid 

defence    of   the   arrangement   in    the  the  unpleasant  recurrence  of  word. 


sc.  HI.]         ROMEO   AND   JULIET  111 

Rom.  O,  thou  wilt  speak  again  of  banishment. 

Fri.   I  '11  give  thee  armour  to  keep  off  that  word ; 

Adversity's  sweet  milk,  philosophy,  5  5 

To  comfort  thee,  though  thou  art  banished. 

Rom.  Yet  "  banished  "  ?      Hang  up  philosophy  ! 
Unless  philosophy  can  make  a  Juliet, 
Displant  a  town,  reverse  a  prince's  doom, 
It  helps  not,  it  prevails  not :  talk  no  more.  60 

Fri.   O,  then  I  see  that  madmen  have  no  ears. 

Rom.   How  should  they,  when  that  wise  men  have  no  eyes  ? 

Fri.   Let  me  dispute  with  thee  of  thy  estate. 

Rom.   Thou  canst  not  speak  of  that  thou  dost  not  feel : 
Wert  thou  as  young  as  I,  Juliet  thy  love,  65 

An  hour  but  married,  Tybalt  murdered, 
Doting  like  me,  and  like  me  banished, 
Then  mightst  thou  speak,  then   mightst  thou  tear 

thy  hair, 

And  fall  upon  the  ground,  as  I  do  now, 
Taking  the  measure  of  an  unmade  grave.  70 

{Knocking  within. 

Fri,   Arise ;  one  knocks ;  good  Romeo,  hide  thyself. 

Rom.   Not  I ;  unless  the  breath  of  heart-sick  groans, 
Mist-like,  infold  me  from  the  search  of  eyes. 

[  Knocking. 

Fri.   Hark,  how  they  knock  ! — Who  's  there  ? — Romeo 
arise ; 

54.  keep  off  that}  O,  F;  beare  off  this  Q  I.  62.  tha'}  Q,  omitted  F. 
63.  dispute}  Q  I,  Q;  dispaire  F."  64.  that}  O,  F;  what  Q  i.  65. 
as  I,  Juliet  thy}  Q  i,  Q  ;  as  Juliet  my  F.  70.  Knocking  .  .  .]  Enter 
Nurse,  and  knocke  Q  (so  F  with  "knockes"). 

63.  dispute  .  .  .  estate]  discuss  70,  measure.  .  .  grave]  So  As  Yen 
with  you  concerning  your  present  Like  It,  11.  vi.  2  :  "  Here  lie  I  down, 
state  of  affairs,  and  measure  out  my  grave," 


112  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 

Thou  wilt  be  taken. — Stay  awhile  ! — Stand  up  ;   7  5 

[Knocking. 

Run  to  my  study. — By  and  by  ! — God's  will, 
What  simpleness  is  this! — I  come,  I  come! 

[Knocking. 
Who  knocks  so  hard  ?   whence  come  you  ?  what 's 

your  will  ? 
Nurse.  [  Within.']   Let  me  come  in,  and  you  shall  know 

my  errand ; 

I  come  from  Lady  Juliet. 
Fri,  Welcome  then.  80 

Enter  Nurse. 

Nurse.  O  holy  friar,  O,  tell  me,  holy  friar, 

Where  is  my  lady's  lord,  where  's  Romeo  ? 

Fri.   There   on    the    ground,   with    his    own    tears    made 
drunk. 

Nurse.   O,  he  is  even  in  my  mistress'  case, 
Just  in  her  case ! 

Fri.  O  woeful  sympathy !  85 

Piteous  predicament ! 

75.  Knocking]  Slud  knock  Qq  2,  3  ;  Knocke  againe  Qq  4,  5  ;  Knocke  F. 
77.  simpleness]  Q,  F  ;  wilfztlness,  Q  i.  79.  [Within]]  Rowe.  So. 
Enter  Nurse]  Rowe  ;  after  line  78  Q,  F.  82.  Where  is\  Q  i ;  Whercs  Q,  F. 

75.  Knocking]  The  puzzling  stage-  are  given  to  the  Nurse.  Farmer  con- 
direction  of  Q  "Slud  knock"  may,  I  jectured  that  they  are  the  Friar's; 
think,  be  thus  explained :  The  original  Steevens  and  most  modern  editors 
word  in  line  76  was  not  study;  stud  have  adopted  the  suggestion.  Unless 
was  written  above,  but  the  word  could  the  Nurse,  in  the  presence  of  the 
not  be  completed,  being  interrupted  learned  Friar,  produces  her  longest 
by  knock ;  study  was  written  in  the  words,  predicament  can  hardly  be 
margin,  and  stud  was  not  erased  ;  hers.  It  means  here,  condition  ;  it 
which  the  printer  misrepresented  as  is  used  for  category,  condition,  by 
Slud.  Portia,  iMerchant  of  Venice,  iv.  i. 

85,  86.  Fri.  0  .  .  .  predicament}  357,  and  by  Hotspur,  1  Henry  IV.  \. 

In  all  the  early  editions  these  words  iii.  168.  The  word  sympathy,  mean- 


sc.  HI.]          ROMEO    AND   JULIET  113 

Nurse.  Even  so  lies  she, 

Blubbering  and  weeping,  weeping  and  blubbering. 
Stand  up,  stand  up  ;   stand,  an  you  be  a  man  : 
For  Juliet's  sake,  for  her  sake,  rise  and  stand  ; 
Why  should  you  fall  into  so  deep  an  O  ?  90 

Rom.   Nurse ! 

Nurse.   Ah  sir  !   ah  sir  !    Well,  death  's  the  end  of  all. 

Rom.   Spakest  thou  of  Juliet?   ho\v  is  it  with  her? 
Doth  she  not  think  me  an  old  murderer, 
Now  I  have  stain'd  the  childhood  of  our  joy          95 
\Vith  blood  removed  but  little  from  her  own  ? 
Where  is  she  ?  and  how  doth  she  ?  and  what  says 
My  conceal'd  lady  to  our  cancell'd  love  ? 

Nurse.   O,  she  says  nothing,  sir,  but  weeps  and  weeps  ; 
And    now    falls     on     her     bed ;     and     then    starts 
up,  100 

And  Tybalt  calls ;  and  then  on  Romeo  cries, 
And  then  down  falls  again. 

Rom.  As  if  that  name, 

Shot  from  the  deadly  level  of  a  gun, 

88.  an]  Ro\ve  ;  ami  O,  F.  90.  0  ?}  Q,  O.  F.  92.  Well,  death  YJ  Q  I  ; 
deaths  Q,  F.  93.  Spakesf}  Q,  Speak' st,  F.  94.  she  not]  Q  I  ;  not  she 
Q,  F.  98.  our  cancell'd]  Q  I,  Q;  our  conceal'd  F.  101.  calls  .  .  . 

cries}  Q,  F;  cries  .   .  .   calls  Q  i.          103.  deadly}  Q,  dead,  F. 

ing    correspondence    or    similarity    of  90.   an    0}    Hanmer,    followed    by 

suffering,    as    in    Titus    Andronicus,  Johnson,  reads  "  deep  an —    Rom.  Oh 

III.   i.    148,   seems  also  to  be  out    of  A'urse.''     O  seems  here  to  mean  an 

the  compass  of  the  Nurse's  vocabu-  exclamation  of  sorrow.     Collier  (MS.) 

lary.      Delias  and    Daniel,    however,  adds     a     stage  -  direction     ''Romeo 

assign  the  words,   with  O,  F,  to  the  groans." 

Nurse.  98.   conceal"  J}  My  lady,  though  that 

87.   Blubbering]  The  suggestion  of  she  is  so  is  concealed  from  the  world, 

ridicule  was  not  necessarily  connected  103.    leref]  range,  line  of  aim.  as  in 

with  this  word,  as  used  by  Flizabethan  Sonnets,  cxvii.  1 1  :  "  Bring  me  within 

writers;    it    occurs  only  here    in    the  the  level  of  your  frown,  But  shoot  not 

text  of  Shakespeare.  at  me  in  your  waken'd  hate." 

8 


114  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 

Did  murder  her,  as  that  name's  cursed  hand 
Murder'd    her     kinsman.       O,    tell    me,    friar,    tell 

me,  105 

In  what  vile  part  of  this  anatomy 
Doth  my  name  lodge  ?  tell  me,  that  I  may  sack 
The  hateful  mansion.  [Drawing  his  sword. 

Fri.  Hold  thy  desperate  hand  : 

Art  thou  a  man  ?   thy  form  cries  out  thou  art : 
Thy  tears  are  womanish  ;  thy  wild  acts  denote    i  i  o 
The  unreasonable  fury  of  a  beast : 
Unseemly  woman  in  a  seeming  man  ! 
And  ill-beseeming  beast  in  seeming  both  ! 
Thou  hast  amazed  me :   by  my  holy  order, 
I  thought  thy  disposition  better  temper'd.  i  i  5 

Hast  thou  slain  Tybalt?   wilt  thou  slay  thyself? 
And  slay  thy  lady  that  in  thy  life  lives, 
By  doing  damned  hate  upon  thyself? 
Why  rail'st    thou    on    thy    birth,  the    heaven    and 

earth  ? 
Since    birth    and    heaven    and    earth,    all    three   do 

meet  120 

In  thee  at  once,  which  thou  at  once  wouldst  lose. 
Fie,  fie  !   thou  shamest  thy  shape,  thy  love,  thy  wit ; 
Which,  like  a  usurer,  abound'st  in  all, 

108.  Drawing  .    .    .]  Theobald  ;    He    offers    to    stab    himself,    and    Nurse 
snatches    the    dagger  away  Q   I.          110.   denote'}  O    I,   Qq  4,    5,   F;  denote 
O;  doe  note.  F  2.  113.    And}    O  F  ;   Or  Q   i.          117.   lady  .   .    .   lives'] 
F  4  ;  lady,   .   .   lies,  Q,  V  •  Lady  too,  that  lives  in  thee?  Q  I. 

106.   anatomy'}  a  body  or  a  "sub-  here  and  in  lines   119-121.       See  p. 

ject"  for  dissection  ;  compare  Twelfth  192. 

Night,  III.  ii.  67.  119.   ?n'rth~\  Romeo  has  not    railed 

109.  Art  thou  a  ?nan  ?~\  Shakespeare  on  his  birth;  but  in  Brooke's   poem 
closely  follows   Brooke's  poem,   both  Romeus  docs  so. 


sc.  in.]         ROMEO   AND   JULIET  115 

And  usest  none  in  that  true  use  indeed 

Which    should    bedeck    thy    shape,   thy    love,    thy 

wit :  125 

Thy  noble  shape  is  but  a  form  of  wax, 
Digressing  from  the  valour  of  a  man  ; 
Thy  dear  love  sworn,  but  hollow  perjury, 
Killing  that  love  which  thou  hast  vow'd  to  cherish  ; 
Thy  wit,  that  ornament  to  shape  and  love,  I  30 

Misshapen  in  the  conduct  of  them  both, 
Like  powder  in  a  skilless  soldier's  flask, 
Is  set  a-fire  by  thine  own  ignorance, 
And  thou  dismember'd  with  thine  own  defence. 
What,  rouse  thee,  man  !  thy  Juliet  is  alive,          i  35 
For  whose  dear  sake  thou  wast  but  lately  dead  ; 
There  art  thou  happy  :   Tybalt  would  kill  thee, 
But    thou   slew'st   Tybalt ;    there    art    thou    happy 

too  : 

The  law  that  threaten'd  death  becomes  thy  friend, 
And  turns  it  to  exile;   there  art  thou  happy:       140 
A  pack  of  blessings  light  upon  thy  back  ; 
Happiness  courts  thee  in  her  best  array ; 
But,  like  a  misbehaved  and  sullen  wench, 


138.  slew'st  .   .   .  too}  Q   i,   F  2  ;   Q.   I-'   omit   too.  139.  becomes]   O, 

became  F.  140.  turns}  Q,  titrnd  F.  141.  of  blessings]  Q,  of  blessing 
Q  3,  or  blessing  F  ;  light]  O,  F;  lights,  Q  I.  Q  4.  142.  her]  Q,  F;  his 
Q  i.  143.  misbehaved]  Q  i,  Qq  4,  5  ;  mishavedQ;  mishaped  F. 

125.  wit]  understanding,  or  judg-  cient    English  soldiers   using   match- 

ment.  lucks  .  .  were  obliged  to  carry  a  lighted 

127.   Digressing]  deviating.     New  match,    hanging    at    their  belts,   very 

Eng.   Diet,  cites  Golding,  Calvin  on  near  to  the   wooden   flask   in    which 

Psalms,     Ixxi.    16:     "As    the    other  they  kept  their  powder." 
translation  agreeth  very  well,  I  would         134.  And  thou]  And   thou   blown 

not  digresse  from  it."  into  fragments  by  what  should  have 

132.  poii'dcr]  Steevens  :   "The  an-  been  thy  means  of  defence. 


116  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 

Thou  pout'st  upon  thy  fortune  and  thy  love : 
Take  heed,  take  heed,  for  such  die  miserable.      145 
Go,  get  thee  to  thy  love,  as  was  decreed, 
Ascend  her  chamber,  hence  and  comfort  her ; 
But  look  thou  stay  not  till  the  watch  be  set, 
For  then  thou  canst  not  pass  to  Mantua ; 
Where  thou  shalt  live  till  we  can  find  a  time       150 
To  blaze  your  marriage,  reconcile  your  friends, 
Beg  pardon  of  the  prince,  and  call  thee  back 
With  twenty  hundred  thousand  times  more  joy 
Than  thou  went'st  forth  in  lamentation. — 
Go  before,  nurse  :   commend  me  to  thy  lady,       I  5  5 
And  bid  her  hasten  all  the  house  to  bed, 
Which  heavy  sorrow  makes  them  apt  unto : 
Romeo  is  coming. 

Nurse.   O  Lord,  I  could  have  stay'd  here  all  the  night 
To  hear  good  counsel :   O,  what  learning  is  !       160 
My  lord,  I  '11  tell  my  lady  you  will  come. 

Rom.  Do  so,  and  bid  my  sweet  prepare  to  chide. 

Nurse.   Here,  sir,  a  ring  she  bid  me  give  you,  sir : 

Hie  you,  make  haste,  for  it  grows  very  late.      \Exit. 

Rom.   How  well  my  comfort  is  revived  by  this!  165 

FrL   Go  hence.      Good  night ;  and  here  stands  all  your 
state : 

144.  pout'st  upon]  O  5,  pou'ts  upon  Q  4,  puts  tip  Q,  pattest  tip  F, 
frown  st  upon  O  i.  152.  the]  Q,  thy  F.  159.  the]  Q,  omitted  F. 
162.]  Nurse  offers  to  goe  in,  and  turnes  againe  O  i.  163.  Here  .  .  .  sir] 
Q,  F  ;  Heerc  is  a  Ring  sir,  that  she  bad  me  give  you  Q  I . 

144.  ponfst  upon]  Steevens  :  "The         163.   Here,  sir]  Daniel  conjectures 

reading  in  the  text  is  confirmed  by  the  Here,  sir's. 

following  passage  in  Coriolanus,  v.  i.          166.   here  stands]  Johnson:    "The 

52  :    '  then  We  pout  upon  the  morn-  whole   of    your   fortune   depends   on 

ing.'"  this." 


sc.  iv. j          ROMEO   AND   JULIET  117 

Either  be  gone  before  the  watch  be  set, 

Or  by  the  break  of  day  disguised  from  hence : 

Sojourn  in  Mantua :   I  '11  find  out  your  man, 

And  he  shall  signify  from  time  to  time  170 

Every  good  hap  to  you  that  chances  here : 

Give    me    thy    hand  ;     'tis    late :     farewell  ;     good 

night. 

Rom.   But  that  a  joy  past  joy  calls  out  on  me, 
It  were  a  grief,  so  brief  to  part  with  thee  : 
Farewell.  \Exeunt.      175 


SCENE  IV. —  The  Same.     A  room  in  Capulefs 
house. 

Enter  CAPULET,  Lady  CAPULET,  and  PARIS. 

Cap.  Things  have  fall'n  out,  sir,  so  unluckily, 

That  we  have  had  no  time  to  move  our  daughter : 

Look  you,  she  loved  her  kinsman  Tybalt  dearly, 

And  so  did  I  :   well,  we  were  born  to  die. 

'Tis  very  late,  she  '11  not  come  down  to-night :         5 

I  promise  you,  but  for  your  company, 

I  would  have  been  a-bed  an  hour  ago. 

Par.   These  times  of  woe  afford  no  time  to  woo. 

Madam,     good      night :      commend     me     to     your 
daughter. 

Lady  Cap.   I     will,     and     know     her      mind     early     to- 
morrow ;  i  o 

1 68.   dis$nised\  F,  disguise  Q. 

Scc'llt?  IV. 

A  room  .  .   .]  Capell.     Enter  .   .   .]  Rowe.         8.   time]  (^  i  ;  limes  Q,  F. 


118  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 

To-night  she  's  mew'd  up  to  her  heaviness. 

Cap.  Sir  Paris,  I  will  make  a  desperate  tender 

Of  my  child's  love :   I  think  she  will  be  ruled 

In  all  respects  by  me ;  nay  more,  I  doubt  it  not. — 

Wife,  go  you  to  her  ere  you  go  to  bed  ;  i  5 

Acquaint  her  here  of  my  son  Paris'  love, 

And  bid  her,  mark  you  me,  on  Wednesday  next — 

But,  soft !   what  day  is  this  ? 

Par.  Monday,  my  lord. 

Cap.   Monday  !  ha,  ha  !      Well,  Wednesday  is  too  soon  ; 
O'  Thursday  let  it  be  : — o'  Thursday,  tell  her,      20 
She  shall  be  married  to  this  noble  earl. 
Will  you  be  ready  ?  do  you  like  this  haste  ? 
We  '11  keep  no  great  ado  ;  a  friend  or  two ; 
For,  hark  you,  Tybalt  being  slain  so  late, 
It  may  be  thought  we  held  him  carelessly,  25 

Being  our  kinsman,  if  we  revel  much. 
Therefore  we  '11  have  some  half  a  dozen  friends, 
And  there  an  end. — But  what  say  you  to  Thursday  ? 

Par.   My  lord,  I  would  that  Thursday  were  to-morrow. 

Cap.  Well,  get  you  gone  :  o'  Thursday  be  it  then. —      30 


II.   she's}  O,  she  is  F.          1 6.   here  of]  Q  4  ;  here,  of  Q,  F  ;  hereof,  Q  3  ; 
here  with   Q   5.  17.   next — ]    Ro\ve  ;    next,    Q,    F.  20.    O"  .   .   .  o} 

Capell ;  A  .   .   .  a  Q,  F.         23.    We  'II  keep}  F,    Well,  keepe  Q.         30.  o'} 
Capell  ;  a  Q,  F. 

11.  merJd    up}     shut    up,    as    in  venturous,  offer.     Steevens  cites  from 
Richard  III.  I.  i.  38.   Mew,  originally  The  Weakest  goeth  to  the.  Wall,  1600: 
a  cage;    afterwards,   as  stated  in  R.  "Witness    this    desperate    tender    of 
Holmes,    Academy   of   Armory    and  mine  honour." 

Blazon,    "the    place  ...   in    which  23.    We'll}    Mommsen    argues    in 

the  hawk  is  put  during  the  time  she  favour    of    Q    Well,    supposing    that 

casts  .   .   .   her  feathers."     The  oldest  Capulet  here  replies  to  a  gesture  of 

meaning  of  the    French   word    is   to  horror,  made  by  his  wife  at  the  sug- 

moult.  gestion    that    she    can    be    so    soon 

12.  desperate  tender}   bold,  or  ad-  ready. 


sc.  v.J          ROMEO   AND   JULIET  119 

Go  you  to  Juliet  ere  you  go  to  bed, 

Prepare  her,  wife,  against  this  wedding-day. — 

Farewell,  my  lord. — Light  to  my  chamber,  ho ! 

Afore  me,  it  is  so  very  very  late, 

That  we  may  call  it  early  by  and  by  : —  35 

Good  night.  [Exeunt. 


SCENE  V. —  Tlie  Same.      Capulefs  orchard. 

Enter  ROMEO  and  JULIET,  above,  at  the  window. 

Jul.   Wilt  thou  be  gone  ?   it  is  not  yet  near  day : 
It  was  the  nightingale,  and  not  the  lark, 
That  pierced  the  fearful  hollow  of  thine  ear ; 
Nightly  she  sings  on  yond  pomegranate  tree  : 

34,  35.   Afore  .   .   .   by  and  by}  Q  I,  Afore  .    .   .   so  very  late  .   .   .   by  and 
by  Q,  A  fort  .   .   .  so  late  ,   ,    .   by  and  by  F. 

Scene  v. 

Enter  .   .  .  above,  at  the  window]  Cambridge  ;  Enter  .   .   .  aloft  Q,   F  ; 
Enter  ...  at  the  window  Q  i.         4.  yond]  Q,  F  ;  yon  Q  i. 

34.  Afore  me]  i.e.  God  before  me  me  to  support  Rowe.     I  believe  that 
(Dyce),  in  the  presence  of  God,  as  in  on  the  Elizabethan  stage  the  dialogue 
Pericles,  II.   i.  84  :   "  Now,  afore  me,  between  Romeo  and  Juliet  took  place 
a  handsome  fellow."      Or  may  it  not  on    the   balcony,  and   that   the  scene 
be  corrupted  from  "  Afore  my  God  "?  then    changed    to    Juliet's   chamber. 
Here  it  is  possible  that  the  words  are  Q  I  introduces  the  Nurse  before  the 
an  instruction  to   the  light-bearer  to  balcony  scene  closes  ;  she  announces 
carry  the  light  before  Capulet,  or  to  that  Lady  Capulet  is  coming  to  Juliet's 
Paris  to  take  precedence  in  leaving  chamber,  and  then  "she  goeth  down 
the  room.  from    the   window";    the   curtain,    I 

35.  by  and  by]  presently,  immedi-  suppose,  was  drawn,  and  the  orchard 
ately,  as  in  n.  ii.  151.  below    immediately   became    Juliet's 

chamber.      But  for  the  inconvenience 

Scene  V.  which  attends   the  disturbing   of  ac- 

Capulet's   orchard]    So    the    Cam-  cepted  arrangements,  I  should  fulluw 

bridge  editors;  several  editors  "Juliet's  Rowe  in  this  division  of  scenes, 

chamber."  Rowe, "Capulet's garden,"  4.  pomegranate]  The  pomegranate 

but  Rowe  closed  the  scene  with  line  had  been  introduced  into  England  as 

59.      The  division  -  marks  which  ap-  early  as  1548;  it  grew  "  plenteously, " 

pear  in  the  later  part  of  Q  I  seem  to  says  Turner,  in  his  Nantes  of  Herbes 


120  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 

Believe  me,  love,  it  was  the  nightingale.  5 

Rom.   It  was  the  lark,  the  herald  of  the  morn, 

No  nightingale :  look,  love,  what  envious  streaks 
Do  lace  the  severing  clouds  in  yonder  east : 
Night's  candles  are  burnt  out,  and  jocund  day 
Stands  tiptoe  on  the  misty  mountain  tops:  10 

I  must  be  gone  and  live,  or  stay  and  die. 
Jul.  Yond  light  is  not  daylight,  I  know  it,  I  : 
It  is  some  meteor  that  the  sun  exhales, 
To  be  to  thee  this  night  a  torch-bearer, 
And  light  thee  on  thy  way  to  Mantua  :  I  5 

Therefore  stay  yet ;   thou  need'st  not  to  be  gone. 
Rom.   Let  me  be  ta'en,  let  me  be  put  to  death ; 
I  am  content,  so  thou  wilt  have  it  so. 
I  '11  say  yon  grey  is  not  the  morning's  eye, 
'Tis  but  the  pale  reflex  of  Cynthia's  brow;  20 

Nor  that  is  not  the  lark,  whose  notes  do  beat 
The  vaulty  heaven  so  high  above  our  heads  : 

10.  mountain'}  Q;  Mountaines  Q  3,  F.  12.  Yond}  O,  F;  Yon  Q  I. 
13.  exhales}  F,  exhale  Q.  16.  Therefore  .  .  .  gone}  Q,  F;  77ien  slay 
awhile,  thou  shall  not  goe  soone  Q  I  (and  Pope,  reading  so  soon}. 

of  that  year,  "in  Italy  and  in  Spayne."  from  Sidney's  Arcadia,  Sir  J.  Davies' 

Knight  quotes,  from  Russel's  account  Orchestra,  and  Drayton's  England1  s 

of  Aleppo,  a  description  of  the  night-  Heroical  Epistles. 

ingale  singing  from  the  pomegranate  16.   stay  yet ;}  Rowe  connected  jf/ 

grove.     It  is  the  male  bird — "he  "not  \vithwhatfollows:   "stay,  yet." 

"she" — who  is  the  chief  singer  ;  but  20.    Cynthia  s   brow}    In     Singer's 

the  tale  of  Tereus  and  Philomela  en-  copy  of  F  2   brow  was   corrected  in 

couraged  the  opposite  notion.  MS.    to  bow;  so  too  Collier  (MS.); 

7.   envious}    malicious,   as  often  in  brow  may  mean  forehead  or  counten- 

Shakespeare.  ance.       Rolfe    understands   that    the 

13.  exhales}  Meteors  were  supposed  moon  is  conceived  as  rising,  and  that 
to  be  derived  from  matter  drawn  up  the   reflex    or    reflection    is   from   the 
by  the  sun  ;   see  1  Henry  IV.  v.  i.  19,  edges  of  the  clouds  lit  up  by  the  moon 
and   Person's    Varieties  (1635),    "Of  behind    them.      Clarke    suggests    an 
Meteors."  allusion    to    the    crescent    borne    on 

14.  torch-bearer}  Todd  quotes  par-  Diana's  forehead. 
allels  for  a  similar  use  of  the  image 


sc.  v.]  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  121 

I  have  more  care  to  stay  than  will  to  go  : 
Come,  death,  and  welcome  !      Juliet  wills  it  so. 
How  is 't,  my  soul?   let's  talk  ;  it  is  not  day.         25 

Jul,    It  is,  it  is  :   hie  hence,  be  gone,  away  ! 
It  is  the  lark  that  sings  so  out  of  tune, 
Straining  harsh  discords  and  unpleasing  sharps. 
Some  say  the  lark  makes  sweet  division  ; 
This  doth  not  so,  for  she  divideth  us  :  30 

Some  say  the  lark  and  loathed  toad  change  eyes  ; 
O,  now  I  would  they  had  changed  voices  too  ! 
Since  arm  from  arm  that  voice  doth  us  affray, 
Hunting  thee  hence  with  hunts-up  to  the  day. 
O,  now  be  gone;   more  light  and  light  it  grows.    35 

Rom.    More   light  and   light ;    more   dark   and   dark   our 
woes  ! 

25.   How  .    .   .   soul?}  Q,  F  ;    What  sayes  my  Love  ?  O  i. 

29.  division]  New  Eng.  Diet,  ;  "A  bird   had   a   harsh    voice   to   sing   of 

rapid  melodic  passage,  originally  con-  harshness. 

ceived  as  the  dividing  of  each  of  a  33.  ciffray~\  NotfrtgAten(asSchmidt 

succession  of  long  notes  into  several  says),  but  disturb  or  startle  from  sleep 

short    ones."      Naylor    (Shakespeare  or  quiet,  as  Chaucer  in  Blaunche  the 

and  Music,  p.  28)  notes  the  cant  term  Duchess  (line  296)  is  affrayed  out  of 

"  note-splitting"  for  the  old-fashioned  his  sleep  by  "  smale  foules." 

variation.       Compare    1    Henry    11'.  34.   hunts  -  zip]    New  Eng.   Diet.: 

ill.   i.    211:    "ravishing  division,  to  "  Originally  the  hunt  is  iip,  name  of  an 

her  lute."     The  songster  (line  30)  is  old  song  and  its  tune,  sung  or  played 

again  she  ;  Q  I  reads  this  in  place  of  to  awaken  huntsmen  in  the  morning  ; 

she.  .   .   .   hence  ...   an    early    morning 

31.   toaif\  Warburton  says  that  the  song."     Compare  Titus  Andronicus, 

toad    having    fine   eyes  and   the   lark  II.    ii.    i.      Cotgrave    (ed.    1632)    has 

ugly  ones,  it  was  commonly  said  that  Resveil,    "a  Hunts-up,    or   morning 

they    had    changed    eyes.       fohnson  song  for  a  new-married  wife,  the  day 

quotes    a     "rustic    rhyme"    to    this  after  the  marriage."     B.  Riche,  Dia- 

effect.      Several   editors  follow  Rowe  lo^ne  between   Mercury,  etc.    (1574): 

in  reading  changed  foi  change.     Heath  "  Unlesse  you  sometimes  arise  to  geve 

explains:    If  the   toad  and  lark  had  your  parramours  the  Jninte  is  u^  under 

changed    voices,     the     lark's     croak  the  windowes." 

would  be  no  signal  of  the  day.     Lines  36.   and  light:}  Theobald  and  other 

33,  34  seem  to  show  that  the  joy  of  editors  read  and  light?     Staunton  has 

the   lark's  song  adds   a  bitterness  to  light! 
Juliet's  grief,  and  that  she  wishes  the 


122  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 

Enter  Nurse. 

Nurse.   Madam  ! 

Jul.   Nurse? 

Nurse.  Your  lady  mother  is  coming  to  your  chamber : 

The  day  is  broke ;  be  wary,  look  about.     [Exit.   40 
Jul.   Then,  window,  let  day  in,  and  let  life  out. 
Rom.   Farewell,  farewell !   one  kiss,  and  I  '11  descend. 

[Descends, 
Jul.   Art  thou  gone  so  ?   love-lord,  ay,  husband-friend  ! 

I  must  hear  from  thee  every  day  in  the  hour, 

For  in  a  minute  there  are  many  days  :  45 

O,  by  this  count  I  shall  be  much  in  years 

Ere  I  again  behold  my  Romeo ! 
Rom.  Farewell ! 

I  will  omit  no  opportunity 

That  may  convey  my  greetings,  love,  to  thee.        50 
Jul.   O,  think'st  thou  we  shall  ever  meet  again  ? 
Rom.   I  doubt  it  not ;  and  all  these  woes  shall  serve 

36.  Enter  Nurse]  Rowe  ;  Enter  Madame  and  Nurse  Q,  F.  38.  Nurse  ?] 
Theobald;  Nurse.  Q,F.  40.  Exit]  Theobald.  42.  Descends]  Theobald, 
He  goeth  downe  Q  I.  43.  love-lord,  ay,  husband-friend!}  Kd.  ;  love, 
Lord,  ay  husband,  friend  Q,  F  (ah  for  ay  F  2) ;  my  Lord,  my  Love,  my  Frend? 
Qi. 

43.   love-lord,  ay,  husband-friend]  I  In    the     corresponding     passage     of 

have  inserted  hyphens ;  love  and  friend  Brooke's  poem  friend  zn&  friendship 

(as   commonly)   mean   lover  •    other-  are  used  where  we  should  use  lover 

wise  a  climax  seems  attempted  with  and  love. 

little   success.     I    think    that  Juliet,  44.  day  in  the  hour]  Collier  (MS.) 

trying  to  amass  into    names   all  the  declines  hyperbole,  and  reads   "hour 

sweetness    of   their   union,    addresses  in  the  day." 

Romeo  as  lover -lord,  and  then,  re-  45.   For  .   .   .   days]   Q    I    has   For 

versing  the   order,  as  husband-lover,  .   .    .   hou't-r  .   .   .   minutes,  and  adds 

insisting  (ay)  on  husband,  and  such  a  Minutes  are  dayes,  so  will  I  number 

husband  as   is   still   a  lover   (friend),  them  :    so    Daniel,    reading  days   for 

Many  editors  follow  Q   i,  "my  lord,  minutes  in  the  first  line, 

my  love,   my  friend  !  "  ;    others  read  52.   /  doubt   it    not}    Daniel    con- 

"  my  love!    my  lord!    my  friend!"  jectures  Ay,  doubt  it  not. 


sc.  v.]  ROMEO    AND   JULIET  123 

For  sweet  discourses  in  our  time  to  come. 
Jul.  O  God  !    I  have  an  ill-divining  soul : 

Methinks  I  see  thee,  now  thou  art  below,  5  5 

As  one  dead  in  the  bottom  of  a  tomb : 

Either  my  eyesight  fails,  or  thou  look'st  pale. 
Rom.   And  trust  me,  love,  in  my  eye  so  do  you  : 

Dry  sorrow  drinks  our  blood.      Adieu,  adieu  ! 

[Exit. 
Jul.   O  fortune,  fortune  !   all  men  call  thee  fickle :  60 

If  thou  art  fickle,  what  dost  thou  with  him 

That  is  renown'd  for  faith  ?      Be  fickle,  fortune  ; 

For  then,  I  hope,  thou  wilt  not  keep  him  long, 

But  send  him  back. 

Lady  Cap.  [  Wit/iin.~\  Ho,  daughter  !  are  you  up  ? 

Jul.   Who  is 't  that  calls?   is  it  my  lady  mother?  65 

Is  she  not  down  so  late,  or  up  so  early  ? 

What  unaccustom'd  cause  procures  her  hither? 

Enter  Lady  CAPULET. 

Lady  Cap.   Why,  how  now,  Juliet! 

Jul.  Madam,  I  am  not  well. 

Lady  Cap.   Evermore  weeping  for  your  cousin's  death  ? 
\Vhat,  wilt    thou  wash    him   from    his    grave  with 
tears  ?  / o 

53.  out-  time'}  F,  our  times  Q,  the  lime  Q  I.  55.  thee,  now}  Pope  ;  thec 
now,  Q,  F  ;  below]  Q  I  ;  so  low  Q,  F.  64.  [Within]]  Capell.  65.  is 
if]  F,  it  i s  Q  ;  mother?}  F  2;  mother.  Q,  F.  67.  Enter  Lady  Capulet] 
Capell ;  Enter  Mother  (after  back,  line  64)  ^),  F. 

55.   below]  Some  editors  prefer  Q,  an  ancient    notion    that    sorrow  con- 

F,  so   low;    I   think    the    so  was    an  sumed  the  blood  .  .  ."     3  Henry  I'f. 

error    caused    by    sov\    immediately  iv.  iv.  22:  "  blood-sucking  sighs. " 
above.  66.  down]  lying  down,  abed. 

59.   Dry  sorrow]  Malone  :   "  He  is         67.  procures]    Hanmer    read    pro- 

accounting  for  their  paleness.     It  was  vokes,  but  no  emendation  is  required. 


124  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 

An    if  thou  couldst,  thou  couldst    not    make    him 
live ; 

Therefore,  have  done  :  some  grief  shows  much  of 
love, 

But  much  of  grief  shows  still  some  want  of  wit. 
Jul.  Yet  let  me  weep  for  such  a  feeling  loss. 
Lady   Cap.    So    shall    you    feel    the    loss,    but    not    the 
friend  75 

Which  you  weep  for. 
Jul.  Feeling  so  the  loss, 

I  cannot  choose  but  ever  \veep  the  friend. 
Lady  Cap.  Well,  girl,  thou  weep'st  not  so   much  for  his 
death 

As  that  the  villain  lives  which  slaughter'd  him. 
Jul.   What  villain,  madam  ? 

Lady  Cap.  That  same  villain,  Romeo.     So 

Jul.  \_Aside.~\  Villain  and  he  be  many  miles  asunder. — 

God  pardon  him  !      I  do,  with  all  my  heart ; 

And  yet  no  man  like  he  doth  grieve  my  heart. 
Lady  Cap.   That  is  because  the  traitor  murderer  lives. 
Jul.   Ay,  madam,  from  the  reach  of  these  my  hands:    85 

Would  none  but  I  might  venge  my  cousin's  death  ! 
Lady  Cap.  We    will    have    vengeance    for    it,   fear   thou 
not : 

Then  weep  no  more.      I  '11  send  to  one  in  Mantua, 

\Vhere  that  same  banish'd  runagate  doth  live, 

71.  An}  Theobald;  And(±,  F.  Si.  [Aside]]  Ilanmer  ;  be]  Q,  F;  are 
(,)  I.  82.  him]  O  4,  F  2  ;  omitted  O,  F.  84.  murderer]  Q,  omitted  F. 

74.  feeling}  sensible,  affecting;  so  76.  Keep  feu]  Theobald  emends  the 
"  feeling  sorrows,"  Winter's  Tale,  \V.  verse  by  reading  "do  weep  for." 
ii.  8.  Mommsen  conjectures  But  feeling  or 

hi  feeling. 


sc.  v.]  ROMEO    AND   JULIET  125 

Shall  give  him  such  an  unaccustom'd  dram  90 

That  he  shall  soon  keep  Tybalt  company  : 
And  then,  I  hope,  thou  wilt  be  satisfied. 

JuL   Indeed,  I  never  shall  be  satisfied 

With  Romeo,  till  I  behold  him — dead — 

Is  my  poor  heart  so  for  a  kinsman  vex'd.  95 

Madam,  if  you  could  find  out  but  a  man 

To  bear  a  poison,  I  would  temper  it, 

That  Romeo  should,  upon  receipt  thereof, 

Soon  sleep  in  quiet.      O,  how  my  heart  abhors 

To  hear  him  named,  and  cannot  come  to  him,    100 

To  wreak  the  love  I  bore  my  cousin  Tybalt 

Upon  his  body  that  hath  slaughter'd  him  ! 

Lady  Cap.    Find   thou   the   means,   and    I  '11  find   such   a 

man. 
But  now  I  '11  tell  thee  joyful  tidings,  girl. 

Jul.   And  joy  comes  well  in  such  a  needy  time.  105 

What  are  they,  I  beseech  your  ladyship  ? 

Lady  Cap.  Well,  well,  thou  hast  a  careful  father,  child  ; 
One  who,  to  put  thee  from  thy  heaviness, 

90.   Shall  .   .   .   c/raw]  O,  F;    That  should  bestow  on  him  so  sure  a  draught 
Q   I.  94.   him— dead—  ]  Theobald  ;    him.     Dead  Q,    F.          101.   cousin 

Tybalt}    F  2  ;   Cozen  (),    F.          105.   needy]  Q,  F  ;  needful  Q   I.  106.    / 

beseech]  Q  4,  ¥2;  beseech  Q,  F. 

94.    Romeo,]  Daniel  reads  Romeo — ,          101.    To.   .   .   Tybalt]  The  addition 

and  puts  a  dash    after  heart   in    the  Tybalt  of  F  2  is  not  accepted  by  all 

next  line.      lie  analyses  the  ambigui-  editors.      Theobald  (omitting  Tybalt) 

ties    of  Juliet's  words    thus  :    "  i.    I  reads    slattghter'd    cousin  ;      Malone 

never  shall  be  satisfied  with   Romeo,  conjectures    »nirder'd  cousin  ;    other 

2.    I    never    shall    be    satisfied    with  suggestions  are  tender  lore,  ever  bore, 

Romeo  till  I  behold  him.      3.    I  never  bore  unto. 

shall    be  satisfied  with   Romeo  till   I          105.   needy]    poor,    beggarly,    pov- 

behold  him  dead.     4.   Till  I  behold  erty-stricken.      Several  editors  prefer 

him.  dead  is  my  poor  heart.    5.   Dead  the  needful  of  Q  I . 
is  my  poor  heart,  so  for  a  kinsman 
vext. " 


126  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 

Hath  sorted  out  a  sudden  day  of  joy, 

That  thou  expect'st  not,  nor  I  look'd  not  for.      I  I  o 

JuL   Madam,  in  happy  time,  what  day  is  that? 

Lady  Cap.   Marry,  my  child,  early  next  Thursday  morn, 
The  gallant,  young,  and  noble  gentleman, 
The  County  Paris,  at  Saint  Peter's  church, 
Shall  happily  make  thee  there  a  joyful  bride.      I  I  5 

JuL  Now,  by  Saint  Peter's  church,  and  Peter  too, 
He  shall  not  make  me  there  a  joyful  bride. 
I  wonder  at  this  haste ;  that  I  must  wed 
Ere  he  that  should  be  husband  comes  to  woo. 
I  pray  you,  tell  my  lord  and  father,  madam,       i  20 
I  will  not  marry  yet ;  and,  when  I  do,  I  swear, 
It  shall  be  Romeo,  whom  you  know  I  hate, 
Rather  than  Paris.      These  are  news  indeed  ! 

Lady  Cap.   Here  comes  your  father ;  tell  him  so  yourself, 
And  see  how  he  will  take  it  at  your  hands.          125 

Enter  CAPULET  and  Nurse. 

Cap.  When  the  sun  sets,  the  air  doth  drizzle  dew ; 
But  for  the  sunset  of  my  brother's  son 
It  rains  downright. 

no.  <u'/m''j/]  Rowe  ;  expects  Q,  F.          ill.  that}  Q,  this  F.          115.  there'} 
Q,  omitted  F.          126.   air}  Qq  4,  5  ;  earth,  Q,  F. 

Hi.   in   happy   time'}    Equivalent,  Lady  Capulet's  promise  (line  104)  of 

says    Schmidt,    to    the    French    a   la  "joyful  tidings." 

bonne   heure,   used    either  to  express          126.   air]  Malone  thought  the  earth 

acquiescence,    or    astonishment    and  of  Q,   F  was    supported  by  Lucrece, 

indignation.  line   1226:   "But  as    the    earth  doth 

121.   /  swear}    omitted    by    some  weep,  the  sun  being  set."     Elsewhere 

editors,  and  absent  from  Q  I .  Shakespeare    speaks    of  the    dew    as 

123.    These  .    .   .   indeed]  given  by  "falling."       Grant    White    suggests 

Collier  (MS.)  to  Lady  Capulet.     As  that  earth  was  printed  for  air  through 

Dyce  observes,  Juliet's  words  refer  to  confusion  caused  by  the  pronunciation 

of  earth,  airth. 


sc.v.]  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  127 

How  now  !   a  conduit,  girl  ?  what,  still  in  tears  ? 
Evermore  showering?      In  one  little  body  130 

Thou  counterfeit'st  a  bark,  a  sea,  a  wind  ; 
For  still  thy  eyes,  which  I  may  call  the  sea, 
Do  ebb  and  flow  with  tears ;  the  bark  thy  body  is, 
Sailing  in  this  salt  flood  ;  the  winds,  thy  sighs  ; 
Who,     raging     with     thy     tears,     and     they     with 
them,  135 

Without  a  sudden  calm,  will  overset 
Thy  tempest- tossed  body. — How  now,  wife  ! 
Have  you  deliver'd  to  her  our  decree  ? 

Lady   Cap.    Ay,  sir ;    but  she  will    none,  she  gives  you 

thanks. 
I  would  the  fool  were  married  to  her  grave  !        1 40 

Cap.  Soft !  take  me  with  you,  take  me  with  you,  wife. 
How  !   will  she  none  ?   doth  she  not  give  us  thanks  ? 
Is  she  not  proud  ?   doth  she  not  count  her  blest, 
Unworthy  as  she  is,  that  we  have  wrought 
So  worthy  a  gentleman  to  be  her  bridegroom?   145 

JuL  Not  proud,  you  have,  but  thankful,  that  you  have  : 
Proud  can  I  never  be  of  what  I  hate ; 

130.  showering?  In  .  .  .  body~\  Q  5;  shoivring  in  .  .  .  body?  Q,  F. 
131.  Thou  counterfeit' st  a]  Q  5,  77iai<  coitntefaits.  A  O,  Thou  counter- 
faits  a  F.  135.  thy}  Q,  the  F.  145.  bridegroom]  F,  Bride  Q.  147. 
'hate}  Q,  have  F. 

129.   conduit}    Malone    notes    that          145.   bridegroom}  The    bride   of  Q 

the    same    image    occurs    more    than  (and   of  it   alone)    is   not  necessarily 

once    in     Brooke's     poem,     and    in  wrong.     In  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth 

Lucrece,  line   1234.      "  Conduits,"  he  centuries    bride    was    used    of    both 

adds,  "  in  the  form  of  human  figures  man    and    woman.       Sylvester,    Du 

were  common  in  Shakespeare's  time."  fiartas,     IV.     ii.     211,     212    (1598): 

133.   body  is}  Ff  2-4  omit  is.  "  Daughter  dear  .   .   .   Isis  bless  thee 

141.   take    me   li'ith    yon}    let    me  and  thy  Bride  With  golden  fruit." 
understand  you,   as  in  1  Henry  11'. 
II.   iv.  506. 


128  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 

But  thankful  even  for  hate,  that  is  meant  love. 

Cap,   How  now  !   how  now,  chop-logic  !      What  is  this  ? 
"  Proud,"  and   "  I   thank   you,"  and    "  I   thank  you 
not";  150 

And  yet  "  not  proud  "  :  mistress  minion,  you, 
Thank  me  no  thankings,  nor  proud  me  no  prouds, 
But  fettle  your  fine  joints  'gainst  Thursday  next, 
To  go  with  Paris  to  Saint  Peter's  church, 
Or  I  will  drag  thee  on  a  hurdle  thither.  155 

Out,  you  green-sickness  carrion  !  out,  you  baggage  ! 
You  tallow-face  ! 

Lady  Cap.  Fie,  fie  !   what,  are  you  mad  ? 

Jul.  Good  father,  I  beseech  you  on  my  knees, 

Hear  me  with  patience  but  to  speak  a  word. 

Cap.   Hang       thee,       young       baggage !         disobedient 
wretch  !  I  60 

149.  How  now!  how  now,']  Qq  3,  4  (with  comma  for  /).  How,  how, 
howhow,  Q,  How.  now  '•  How  now  ?  F,  How,  how !  how,  how !  Capell  ; 
chop-logic!}  Steevens  (from  Q  i),  choft  lodgick.  Q,  Chopt  Logicke?  F. 
151.  And  .  .  .  you]  Q,  omitted  F;  proud:]  Q  4,  proud  Q.  156.  green- 
sickness] hyphen  F  4  (and  so  tallow-face,  line  157). 

149.  chop-logic']  To  chop  is  to  barter,      "Grace  me  no  grace,   nor  uncle  me 
give   in   exchange  ;    to  chop  logic,    to     no  uncle." 

exchange  or  bandy  logic  ;  a  chop-logic         153.  fettlti\  Ff  2-4  r&sAsettle.     The 

is  a   contentious,    sophistical    arguer.  primary  sense  of fettle  seems  to  be  to 

Awdelay,    Fraternitye  of  Vacabondcs  gird  up  ;  hence   to  make  ready,   put 

(1561),  p.  15,  New  Sh.  Soc.  reprint:  in    order.       New    Eng.     Diet,     cites 

"  Choplogyke    is    he    that    when    his  Schole-House  of  Women  (1561),  571, 

mayster  rebuketh  him  of  hys  fault  he  in  Hazlitt's  English  Popular  Poetry, 

wyll  geve  him  xx  words  for  one."  iv.  127  :   "  Our  iily  is  fettled  unto  the 

150.  "  Proud"'}     Hudson     adopts  saddle."       See     a     long     article     in 
Lettsom's  conjecture :  Wright's      English      Dialect      Diet. 

"Proud,   and  yet  not  proud,  and  /  Elizabethan  and  earlier  examples  are 

thank  you  not  \  not  uncommon. 

And  yet  1  thank  you.'''  156,  157.  green  -  sickness      carrion 

151.  mistress} pronounced  probably  .   .    .   tallow-face]    The    vituperative 
as    a    trisyllable.       Theobald    reads  words  dramatically  suggest  the  pallor 
Why,  mistress.  of     [uliet  ;     baggage,     compare    Cot- 

152.  Thank    .    .    .    proitds]    Rolfe     grave,  "Bagasse,  a  baggage,  queane, 
compares    Richard    II.    II.    iii.    87  :     lyll." 


sc.  v.J  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  129 

I  tell  thee  what :  get  thee  to  church  o'  Thursday, 

Or  never  after  look  me  in  the  face : 

Speak  not,  reply  not,  do  not  answer  me ; 

My  fingers  itch. — Wife,  we  scarce  thought  us  blest 

That  God  had  lent  us  but  this  only  child  ;  165 

But  now  I  see  this  one  is  one  too  much, 

And  that  we  have  a  curse  in  having  her. 

Out  on  her,  hilding  ! 

Nurse.  God  in  heaven  bless  her  ! — 

You  are  to  blame,  my  lord,  to  rate  her  so. 

Cap.  And  why,  my  lady  wisdom  ?  hold  your  tongue,   I  70 
Good  prudence  ;  smatter  with  your  gossips  ;  go. 

Nurse.   I  speak  no  treason. 

Cap.  O,  God  ye  good  den. 

Nurse.   May  not  one  speak  ? 

Cap.  Peace,  you  mumbling  fool  ! 

Utter  your  gravity  o'er  a  gossip's  bowl, 
For  here  we  need  it  not. 

Lady  Cap.  You  are  too  hot.         1 7  5 

161.  o1}  Theobald;  a  Q,  F.  164.  iich,—  Wife,}  Capell,  itch  :  Wife,Q$, 
itch,  wife,  Q,  itch,  -wife  :  F.  165.  lent}  Q,  F  ;  sent  Q  i.  167.  curse}  Q, 
F;  crosse  Q  I.  171.  prudence;  smatter'}  F  (comma  after  Prudence), 

Prudence  smatter  Q  ;  gossips]  Q,  gossip  F.  172.  Cap.  O,  .  .  .  den}  Capell 
(hyphening  God-ye-good-den,  and  adding  ?)  ;  Cap.  Oh  goddegodden  Q  I  ; 
Father,  6  Godigeden  Q  (continued  to  Nurse,  and  so  F,  spelling  Godigoden) ; 
Fa.  O  Godigeden  Qq  4,  5.  173.  Nurse]  Qq  4,  5  ;  omitted  Q,  F.  174. 
bowl}  Q,  bowles  F. 

165.  lent}  Many  editors  prefer  the  5   rightly  assign  these  words  to  Fa. 

sent  of  Q  I.  (Father,   i.e.    Capulet).     Q,    F  make 

168.  hilding}  See  II.  iv.  47.  Father  part  of  the  speech,  assigning 

171.  smaller}  prate.     So  J.    Iley-  to  Nurse  the  words  from  "  I  speak " 
wood,  The  Pardoner  and  the  Friar:  to  "one  speak?" 

"  What,   standest  thou   there  all  the          173.   Peace}  Theobald  emended  the 

day  smattering  !"   Ilazlitt's  Dodsley's  metre  by  reading  Peace,  peace.     Fleay 

Old  Plays,  i.  211.  conjectures  speak  t' ye  as  the  close  of 

172.  God  ye  good  den}  God   give  the  Nurse's  preceding  speech, 
you  good  even  ;  see  I.  ii.  58.     Qq  4, 

9 


130 


ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 


Cap.  God's  bread  !   it  makes  me  mad. 

Day,  night,  hour,  tide,  time,  work,  play, 

Alone,  in  company,  still  my  care  hath  been 

To  have  her  match'd ;  and  having  now  provided 

A  gentleman  of  noble  parentage,  i  So 

Of  fair  demesnes,  youthful,  and  nobly  train'd, 

Stuff'd,  as  they  say,  with  honourable  parts, 

Proportion'd  as  one's  thought  would  wish  a  man  ; 

And  then  to  have  a  wretched  puling  fool, 

A  whining  mammet,  in  her  fortune's  tender,        185 

To  answer  "  I  '11  not  wed,"  "  I  cannot  love," 

"  I  am  too  young,"  "  I  pray  you,  pardon  me." 

176-178.  God's  .  .  .  companyi}  Q,  F;  Gods  blessed  mother  ivife  it  mads 
me,  Day,  night,  early,  lafe,  at  home,  abroad,  Alone,  in  company,  "waking 
or  sleeping,  Q  I.  177.  tide}  Q,  rideY.  180.  noble}^,  F  ;  princely  Q  I. 
181.  train'dlQ  I  ;  liandQ  ;  allied^  3-5,  F.  183.  thought -would}  Q,  F  ; 
heart  could  Q  I.  185.  fort line' :s]  Theobald  ;  fortunes  Q,  F. 


176-178]  Pope,    following,    in  the 
main,  Q  I,  read  : 

"  God's  bread  !  it  makes  me  mad  : 

da}',  night,  late,  early, 
At    home,     abroad ;     alone,     in 

company, 

Waking  or  sleeping,  still,"  etc. 
So  Malone,   reading  with  O  I  early, 
/W<?.— Fleay  conjectured   and    Daniel 
reads  : 

"  God's  bread,  it  makes  me  mad  : 
Day-tide,   night-time,  waking  or 

sleeping  hour, 
At     home,     abroad,     alone,     in 

company, 

Working  or  playing,  still,"  etc. 
Perhaps  Shakespeare  intended  that 
Capulet's  madness  should  break  the 
metrical  regularity.  A  passage  in 
the  play  Wily  Beguiled,  resembling 
this  speech,  is  quoted  by  Malone ; 
but  his  statement  that  Nash  in  1596 
alluded  to  this  old  play  is  probably 
an  error  ;  the  earliest  existing  edition 
is  of  1606.  Several  hints  for  this 


speech  were   derived   from   Brooke's 
poem. 

1 78.  my  care"}  Rush  ton,  Shakespeare's 
Euphuism,  p.  64,  cites  Lyly  :  "  Mine 
only  care  hath  benehetherto,  to  match 
thee.  .  .  .  At  the  last  I  have  found 
...  a  gentleman  of  great  revenues, 
of  a  noble  progenie,  of  honest 
behaviour,  of  comly  personage." 

181.  train'd}  The  allied  of  Q  3  is 
preferred  by  several  editors.  On  the 
suggestion  of  O  Hand,  Capell  con- 
jectured 'lianc'd;  Mommsen  lined 
(spoken  of  Paris'  purse),  or  loirfd. 

185.  mammet  .  .  .  tender}  a 
whining  puppet,  on  the  offer  of  good 
fortune.  Mammet  or  mamnet,  an 
idol  (from  the  supposed  idolatry  of 
the  religion  of  Mahomet),  hence  a 
puppet.  So  1  Henry  IV.  II.  iii.  95  : 
"to  play  with  mammets."  livery 
Woman  in  her  Humour  (1609)  :  "I 
have  seen  the  city  of  New  Nineveh 
and  Julius  Csesar  acted  bv  mammets." 


sc.  v.]  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  131 

But,  an  you  will  not  wed,  I  '11  pardon  you : 

Graze  where  you  will,  you  shall  not  house  with  me : 

Look  to  't,  think  on  't,  I  do  not  use  to  jest.          190 

Thursday  is  near;   lay  hand  on  heart,  advise: 

An  you  be  mine,  I  '11  give  you  to  my  friend  ; 

An    you    be    not,    hang,    beg,    starve,    die    in    the 

streets, 

For,  by  my  soul,  I  '11  ne'er  acknowledge  thee, 
Nor  what  is  mine  shall  never  do  thee  good.         195 
Trust  to  't,  bethink  you  ;   I  '11  not  be  forsworn. 

[Exit. 

Jul,   Is  there  no  pity  sitting  in  the  clouds, 

That  sees  into  the  bottom  of  my  grief? 

O,  sweet  my  mother,  cast  me  not  away  ! 

Delay  this  marriage  for  a  month,  a  week  ;  200 

Or,  if  you  do  not,  make  the  bridal  bed 

In  that  dim  monument  where  Tybalt  lies. 

Lady  Cap.  Talk  not  to  me,  for  I  '11  not  speak  a  word. 

Do  as  thou  wilt,  for  I  have  done  with  thee.      [Exit. 

Jul.  O     God  !  —  O     nurse !     how     shall     this     be     pre- 
vented ?  205 
My  husband  is  on  earth,  my  faith  in  heaven ; 
How  shall  that  faith  return  again  to  earth, 
Unless  that  husband  send  it  me  from  heaven 
By  leaving  earth  ? — comfort  me,  counsel  me. — 
Alack,       alack,       that       heaven       should      practise 
stratagems                                                                  210 
Upon  so  soft  a  subject  as  myself! — 
What  say'st  thou  ?   hast  thou  not  a  word  of  joy  ? 
Some  comfort,  nurse. 

iSS.   an]  Capell  ;  and  Q,  F.          192,  193.   An'}  Capell  ;  And  Q,  F. 


132  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  m. 

Nurse.  Faith,  here  'tis.      Romeo 

Is  banished  ;  and  all  the  world  to  nothing, 
That    he    dares     ne'er     come     back     to    challenge 
you ;  215 

Or,  if  he  do,  it  needs  must  be  by  stealth. 
Then,  since  the  case  so  stands  as  now  it  doth, 
I  think  it  best  you  married  with  the  county. 
O,  he  's  a  lovely  gentleman  ; 

Romeo  's  a  dishclout  to  him  :  an  eagle,  madam,  220 
Hath  not  so  green,  so  quick,  so  fair  an  eye 
As  Paris  hath.      Beshrew  my  very  heart, 
I  think  you  are  happy  in  this  second  match. 
For  it  excels  your  first :  or  if  it  did  not, 
Your  first  is  dead,  or  'twere  as  good  he  were       225 
As  living  here  and  you  no  use  of  him. 
Jul.  Speakest  thou  from  thy  heart  ? 

Nurse.  And  from  my  soul  too  ; 

Or  else  beshrew  them  both. 

227,  228.  And  .   .  .   botJi\  F,  one  line  (omitting  or)  Q; 

213.  Nurse]  In  this  speech  Shake-  Drummond,  the  gods  advise  Nature 

speare  adopts  and  develops  suggest-  as  to  the  most  desirable  colour  for 

ions  from  Brooke's  poem.  Auristella's  eyes  ;  Nature  accepts  the 

215.  challenge]  lay  claim  to.  The  advice  of  Jove  and  Venus,  and  the 

word  is  also  used  for  arraign,  impeach,  eyes  are  "a  paradise  of  green." 

220.  dishcloHt]    A    common    mode  Compare  the    comic   praise  of  green 
of  comparison  ;  so  Massinger,  fiasliful  eyes  in  Midsummer  Nighfs  Dream, 
Lover,  v.   i.  :   "I  am  gazing  on  I  his  V.  i.  342. 

gorgeous  house  ;  our  cote 's  a  dishclout  226.  here~\    Ilanmer    read    hence; 

to  it."'  Johnson  says  that  here  may  signify  /;; 

221.  green}   Ilanmer,    followed   by  this    world;     an     anonymous     critic 
Warburton  and  Johnson,    read  keen,  suggests    there.       Mr.    A.    Thiselton 
From    Chaucer    to    Longfellow    the  suggests  that  here  is  equal  to  he' re, 
praises   of  green   or  greenish  -  yellow  that  is  he  tvere. 

(citrine)    eyes   have    been    sung,    and  227.]  To  square  the  line  to  suit  the 

not  in  English  poetry  alone.      In  The  editor's   ear    >Steevens    omitted    And, 

T'a;j  Noble  Kinsmen,  v.  i.,  we  have  CapellyV0w  (before  my  soul],  Ilanmer 

"  thy  rare  green  eye. "    In  a  sonnet  by  too. 


ROMEO   AND   JULIET  133 

Jul.  Amen ! 

Nurse.  What  ? 

Jul.  Well,  thou  hast  comforted  me  marvellous  much. 

Go  in;  and  tell  my  lady  I  am  gone,  230 

Having  displeased  my  father,  to  Laurence'  cell, 
To  make  confession  and  to  be  absolved. 

Xnrsc.   Marry,  I  will  ;   and  this  is  wisely  done.          \Exit. 

Jnl.   Ancient  damnation  !   O  most  wicked  fiend  ! 

Is  it  more  sin  to  wish  me  thus  forsworn,  235 

Or  to  dispraise  my  lord  with  that  same  tongue 
Which  she  hath  praised  him  with  above  compare 
So  many  thousand  times  ? — Go,  counsellor  ; 
Thou  and  my  bosom  henceforth  shall  be  twain. — 
I  '11  to  the  friar,  to  know  his  remedy  :  240 

If  all  else  fail,  myself  have  power  to  die.  [Exit. 

ACT  IV 

SCENE  I. —  Verona.     Friar  Laurences  cell. 

Enter  Friar  LAURENCE  and  PARIS. 

Fri.   On  Thursday,  sir?   the  time  is  very  short. 
Par.   My  father  Capulet  will  have  it  so  ; 


Act  IV.  Scent  i. 
Friar  Laurence's  cell]  Capell. 


234.  iv  i  eke  a  fiend]  Pycc  (cd.  2) 
cites  the  same  term  of  reproach  from  reads  cursed  with  Q  I.  S.  Walker. 
Marston,  The  Malcontent  ( 1604).  In  thinking  ivickcd  "flat,"  conjectured 
Westward  Hoc  (Pearson's  Dekker,  ii.  wither d. 


134  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  iv. 

And  I  am  nothing  slow  to  slack  his  haste. 

Fri.  You  say  you  do  not  know  the  lady's  mind  : 

Uneven  is  the  course ;   I  like  it  not.  5 

Par.   Immoderately  she  weeps  for  Tybalt's  death, 
And  therefore  have  I  little  talk'd  of  love, 
For  Venus  smiles  not  in  a  house  of  tears. 
Now,  sir,  her  father  counts  it  dangerous 
That  she  doth  give  her  sorrow  so  much  sway,        I  o 
And  in  his  wisdom  hastes  our  marriage, 
To  stop  the  inundation  of  her  tears, 
Which,  too  much  minded  by  herself  alone, 
May  be  put  from  her  by  society  : 
Now  do  you  know  the  reason  of  this  haste.  I  5 

Fri.  [Aside.~\   I    would    I    knew    not   why    it   should    be 

slow'd — 
Look,  sir,  here  comes  the  lady  towards  my  cell. 

Enter  JULIET. 

Par.   Happily  met,  my  lady  and  my  wife  ! 
Jul.  That  may  be,  sir,  when  I  may  be  a  wife. 

3.  slow  to  slack'}  Q,  F  ;  slacke  to  slow  Q  I.  7.  talk' if]  Q  5  ;  talke  Q, 
F.  i o.  dotli\  Q  (alone)  reads  do.  15.  haste.'}  Q,  hast  ?  F.  1 6.  [Aside]] 
Theobald.  17.  towards]  F,  toward  Q.  iS.  Happily  mcf\  Q,  F  ;  Wel- 
come my  love  Q  I. 

3.  slow  to  slack]  Malone  :   "There  11.11.298:   "be  even  and  direct  with 

is  nothing  of  slowness  in  me,  to  in-  me." 

duce    me    to    slacken    or    abate    his  7.   talk'd]    Mommsen    defends  talk 

haste."      Johnson    conjectured    back  O,  F,   as  referring  to   fuliet's  silence 

(for  slack],   i.e.   to  abet  and  enforce,  consequent  on  her  grief. 

Knight :    "I  am  nothing  slow  (so  as)  10.   sway}  Collier  (MS.)  way. 

to  slack  his  haste.''  which  seems  the  u.   marriage]  a  trisyllable,   as  oc- 

right  explanation.  casionally  elsewhere  in  Shakespeare. 

5.    Uneven]  indirect,  not    straight-  16.   slow' it}  Steevens  cites  Gorges' 

forward.     See  A'ew  Eng.  Diet.,  even,  J.ncan's    Pharsalia,    ii.  :    "will    you 

4.     Compare   "even  play  of  battle,"  overflow     The     fields,     thereby     my 

Henry  V.   iv.   viii.  1 14,  and  Hamlet,  march  to  slow." 


SCM.J  HOMED    AND   JULIET  135 

Par.   That  may  be  must  be,  love,  on  Thursday  next.    20 

Jul.   What  must  be  shall  be. 

Fri.  That 's  a  certain  text. 

Par.   Come  you  to  make  confession  to  this  father  ? 

Jul.  To  answer  that,  I  should  confess  to  you. 

Par.   Do  not  deny  to  him  that  you  love  me. 

Jul.    I  will  confess  to  you  that  I  love  him.  25 

Par.   So  will  ye,  I  am  sure,  that  you  love  me. 

Jul.   If  I  do  so,  it  will  be  of  more  price 

Being  spoke  behind  your  back,  than  to  your  face. 
Par.   Poor  soul,  thy  face  is  much  abused  with  tears. 
Jul.   The  tears  have  got  small  victory  by  that ;  30 

For  it  was  bad  enough  before  their  spite. 
Par.   Thou  wrong'st  it  more  than  tears  with  that  report. 
Jul.  That  is  no  slander,  sir,  which  is  a  truth, 

And  what  I  spake,  I  spake  it  to  my  face. 
Par.  Thy  face  is  mine,  and  thou  hast  slander'd  it.         35 
Jul.   It  may  be  so,  for  it  is  not  mine  own. — 

Are  you  at  leisure,  holy  father,  now ; 

Or  shall  I  come  to  you  at  evening  mass  ? 
Fri.   My  leisure  serves  me,  pensive  daughter,  now. — 

My  lord,  we  must  entreat  the  time  alone.  40 

23.  I  should]  Q,  F  ;  tvcre  to  O  i.  26.  jv]  O,  F  ;  you  Capell  and  others. 
33.  slander  .  .  .  a  truth}  O,  F  :  ii'rong  sir,  that  is  a  truth  Q  I  (so  Capell, 
reading  but  a}.  34.  my'}  O,  thy  F.  40.  tcv]  O  i,  O  ;  you  F  ;  /  Ff  2-4. 

38.   evening  mass]  Sec  77/6*  Religion  tion    in    Germany,    and    perhaps    in 

of  Shakespeare,  chiefly  front  the  writ-  England  ;  finally,  that  in  Verona  the 

in^s  of  Richard  Simpson,   by  II.    S.  forbidden  custom  lingered  to  the  nine- 

Howdon    (1899),    pp.    271-274;  it  is  teenth  century. 

there  shown   that   mass  was  used  of         40.   entreat}  Schmidt  explains  "  beg 

various   church    offices;   that,    in    the  to  be  left  alone."     New  Eng.   Diet. 

.stricter  sense  of  mass,  there  was  great  reading  with  F,  "you  must  entreat," 

latitude   in   ancient   times    as    to    the  explains  beguile,  pass  (time)  ;  but  the 

hour;    that    I'ius    v.    (1566-72)    pro-  Diet,  gives  no  other  example  of  this 

hibited  evening  masses  ;  that  the  new  sense. 
law  was  slow  in  coming  into  opera- 


136  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  iv. 

Par.  God  shield  I  should  disturb  devotion  ! — 
Juliet,  on  Thursday  early  will  I  rouse  ye : 
Till  then,  adieu ;  and  keep  this  holy  kiss.  \Exit. 

Jul.  O,  shut  the  door,  and  when  thou  hast  done  so, 

Come  weep  with   me ;  past    hope,   past    cure,  past 
help!  45 

Fri.  Ah,  Juliet,  I  already  know  thy  grief! 

It  strains  me  past  the  compass  of  my  wits : 

I  hear  thou  must,  and  nothing  may  prorogue  it, 

On  Thursday  next  be  married  to  this  county. 

Jul.   Tell  me  not,  friar,  that  thou  hear'st  of  this,  50 

Unless  thou  tell  me  how  I  may  prevent  it : 
If  in  thy  wisdom  thou  canst  give  no  help, 
Do  thou  but  call  my  resolution  wise, 
And  with  this  knife  I  '11  help  it  presently. 
God    join'd     my    heart     and     Romeo's,    thou     our 
hands ;  5  5 

And  ere  this  hand,  by  thee  to  Romeo  seal'd, 
Shall  be  the  label  to  another  deed, 
Or  my  true  heart  with  treacherous  revolt 

41.    God   shield   /]    Q    5,    Godsliicld,    I    Q,    Godshield:    I    F.  42. 

yc\  O,  F  ;  you  Theobald  and  others.  44.  0.}  O,  F  ;  Go  Q  i.  45. 
cure}  O  i,  Q  5  ;  care  Q,  F.  46.  Ah}  Q  I  ;  0  Q,  F.  47.  strains}  Q, 
st reames  F.  54.  with  this}  Q,  -witK  his  F.  56.  Romeo}  F,  Ronieos  Q, 
Roinco 's  Q  5  and  some  editors. 

41.    God  shield}   Schmidt   explains  ii.    28,    we  have:   "past  cure  is  still 

God  forbid  ;  a  shield  may  both  repel  past  care/' 
and  protect  ;  so,   perhaps,  equivalent         48.  prorogue}  See  n.  ii.  78- 
to  God  defend    us!    in   Midsummer         54.  knife}  White:   "The  ladies  of 

Nighfs  Drea/n,  in.  i.  31:   "  to  bring  Shakespeare's  day  customarily  wore 

in  —  God    shield   us  —  a   lion  among  knives  at  their  girdles. " 
ladies."  57.   label}   The    seals    of  deeds,  as 

45.   fit  re]  Some  editors  prefer  car,:  Malone    explains,     in    Shakespeare's 

Q,   F,  on  the  ground   that  fast  cure  time    were    appended     on    slips    or 

and  past   help   are    substantially    the  labels    affixed    to    the     deed.       See 

same.      In    Lore's   Labour  s  Lost,   V.  Richard  II.  V.  ii.  56. 


sc.  i.]  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  137 

Turn  to  another,  this  shall  slay  them  both : 
Therefore,  out  of  thy  long-experienced  time,          60 
Give  me  some  present  counsel ;  or,  behold, 
'Twixt  my  extremes  and  me  this  bloody  knife 
Shall  play  the  umpire,  arbitrating  that 
Which  the  commission  of  thy  years  and  art 
Could  to  no  issue  of  true  honour  bring.  65 

Be  not  so  long  to  speak  ;   I  long  to  die, 
Of  what  thou  speak'st  speak  not  of  remedy. 
Fri.   Hold,  daughter :   I  do  spy  a  kind  of  hope, 
Which  craves  as  desperate  an  execution 
As  that  is  desperate  which  we  would  prevent.        70 
If,  rather  than  to  marry  County  Paris, 
Thou  hast  the  strength  of  will  to  slay  thyself, 
Then  is  it  likely  thou  wilt  undertake 
A  thing  like  death  to  chide  away  this  shame, 
That    copest    with    death    himself    to    scape    from 

it;  75 

And,  if  thou  darest,  I  '11  give  thee  remedy. 
Jul.  O,  bid  me  leap,  rather  than  marry  Paris, 

From  off  the  battlements  of  yonder  tower  ; 
Or  walk  in  thievish  ways  ;  or  bid  me  lurk 

60.  long-experienced}  hyphen  Pope  (F  spells  expeti,:mf].  66.  Be  .  .  . 
'#<•]  Q,  F  ;  Speakc  not,  be  brief e :  for  I  desire  to  die  Q  I.  72.  of ' u*i '11}  O, 
F  ;  or  tc'/'//  O  i  ;  slay}  Q  I,  Qq  4,  <;  ;  stay  Q,  F  ;  lay  F  2.  75.  from}  Q, 
fro  V.  78.  yondt-r}  Q  I  ;  any  Q,  F.  '79,  So.  Or  walk  .  .  .  bears}  Q,  F  ; 
Or  chaine  me  to  sonic  steeple  inounlaines  top,  IVhcre  roaring Beares  and  savage 
Lions  are :  Q  I. 

62.  extremes}    extremities,    straits,         76.   And,    if}    Delius    conjectures 

sufferings,  as  in  Troilns  and  Cressida,  An  if. 
iv.  ii.  108.  78.  yondfr}  Ulrici  considers  any  O, 

64.   commission}  authority,  warrant,  F    more    vigorous  • — •  an}'    tower,    no 

as  often  in  Shakespeare.  matter  how  high. 

69.   an     execution}     Walker     con- 
jectures that  an  is  an  interpolation. 


138  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  iv. 

Where     serpents     are  ;      chain     me     with     roaring 
bears ;  80 

Or  shut  me  nightly  in  a  charnel-house, 
O'er-cover'd  quite  with  dead  men's  rattling  bones, 
With  reeky  shanks,  and  yellow  chapless  skulls  ; 
Or  bid  me  go  into  a  new-made  grave 
And  hide  me  with  a  dead  man  in  his  shroud  ;       85 
Things    that,   to   hear   them    told,    have    made    me 

tremble  ; 

And  I  will  do  it  without  fear  or  doubt, 
To  live  an  unstain'd  wife  to  my  sweet  love. 
Fri.   Hold,  then  ;   go  home,  be  merry,  give  consent 

To  marry  Paris  :   Wednesday  is  to-morrow7 :  90 

To-morrow  night  look  that  thou  lie  alone, 

Let  not  thy  nurse  lie  with  thee  in  thy  chamber : 

Take  thou  this  vial,  being  then  in  bed, 

And  this  distilled  liquor  drink  thou  off; 

When  presently  through  all  thy  veins  shall  run     95 

A  cold  and  drowsy  humour;  for  no  pulse 

Shall  keep  his  native  progress,  but  surcease ; 

No  wrarmth,  no  breath,  shall  testify  thou  livest ; 

Si.  shitf]  Q  I  ;  hide  Q,  F,  and  many  editors.  83.  chapless']  Q  4,  chapels 
Q,  chappels  F.  85.  shroud}  Qq  4,  5  ;  omitted  Q  ;  grave  F.  86.  told} 
O,  F  ;  nainde  Q  I.  92.  thy  nurse'}  F,  the  Nurse  Q.  94.  distilled]  Q  I; 
distilling  Q,  F.  98.  breatli}  F,  breast  Q. 

83.  rccky~\  reeking  with  malodorous  93.    Take  thou}  Shakespeare  in  what 

vapours  ;  strictly   smoky,    and    hence  follows  derives  much  from    Brooke's 

foul  ;  see  note  on  Hamlet  (ed.  Dow-  poem, 

den),  ill.  iv.  184.  96,  97.   A  cold  .   .   .   snricasc}  Q   I 

89-93.    Hold  .   .   .   bed'}  Q  I  reads  :  reads  : 

"  Hold    Juliet,    hie    thee    home,    get  "A  dull  and  heavie  slumber,  which 

thee  to  bed.  shall  seaze 

Let  not  thy  Nurse  lye  with  thee  in  Each    vitall    spirit :     for    no    Ful.se 

thy  Chamber :  shall  keepe 

And    when    thou    art    alone,    take  His    naturall    proqresse,    but    sur- 

thou  this  Violl."  cease  to  bcate  : :) 


sc.1.]  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  139 

The  roses  in  thy  lips  and  cheeks  shall  fade 

To  paly  ashes  ;  thy  eyes'  windows  fall,  I OO 

Like  death,  when  he  shuts  up  the  day  of  life ; 

Each  part,  deprived  of  supple  government, 

Shall,  stiff  and  stark  and  cold,  appear  like  death  ; 

And  in  this  borrow'd  likeness  of  shrunk  death 

Thou  shalt  continue  two  and  forty  hours,  105 

And  then  awake  as  from  a  pleasant  sleep. 

Now,  when  the  bridegroom  in  the  morning  comes 

To  rouse  thee  from  thy  bed,  there  art  thou  dead  : 

Then,  as  the  manner  of  our  country  is, 

In  thy  best  robes  uncover'd  on  the  bier  I  10 

Thou  shalt  be  borne  to  that  same  ancient  vault 

Where  all  the  kindred  of  the  Capulets  lie. 

In  the  mean  time,  against  thou  shalt  awake, 

Shall  Romeo  by  my  letters  know  our  drift, 

And  hither  shall  he  come ;    and  he  and  I  115 

Will  watch  thy  waking,  and  that  very  night 

Shall  Romeo  bear  thee  hence  to  Mantua. 

And  this  shall  free  thee  from  this  present  shame, 

If  no  inconstant  toy  nor  womanish  fear 

99.  fadc}(}  3,  F;  fade:  Q.  100.  To  faly}  Q  5,  7\w  many  Q,  To  many 
F,  To  mealy  F  2;  'thy'}  Q,  the  F.  101.  shuts}  n,  shut  F.  in.  shaft] 
F,  shall  O.  115,  1 1 6.  and  .  .  .  waki/ij]  Oq  3-5,  an  .  .  .  walking  O, 
omiitcd  F.  119.  inconstant]  Q,  F;  uneonstant  Ff  3,  4,  and  several 

editors. 

105.   t'i'o  and  forty  hours]  Maginn     hands,  and  feet  all  naked,  and  wear- 
proposed  two  and  fifty  ;  .Marsh  (Notes 
and  Queries,    1877)  two   and   thirty. 
See  Introduction. 

1 10.   best    robes]      Malone     notices 

that   the    Italian   custom    of   carrying     to  ljurial  in  thy  kindreds  grave." 
the    dead    body    to    the    grave    richly     was  doubtless,  as  Daniel  observes,  an 
dressed,  and  with   the  face  uncovered     uneffaced  variation  of  line    ill  in  the 
is  described  in  Brooke's  poem.  Coryat,      "  copy  :  from  which  (J  was  printed. 
Crudities,  ii.  27  :  "  For  they  [in  Italy] 
carry  the  corse  to  church  with  face, 


140  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  iv. 

Abate  thy  valour  in  the  acting  it.  120 

JuL  Give  me,  give  me  !      O,  tell  not  me  of  fear ! 
Fri.   Hold ;  get  you  gone :  be  strong  and  prosperous 

In  this  resolve.      I  '11  send  a  friar  with  speed 

To  Mantua,  with  my  letters  to  thy  lord. 
JuL  Love    give   me    strength  !    and    strength   shall    help 
afford.  125 

Farewell,  dear  father.  \Exeunt. 


SCENE   II. —  The  Same.     Hall  in  Capulefs  house. 

Enter  CAPULET,  Lady  CAPULET,  Nurse,  and 
Servingmen. 

Cap.  So  many  guests  invite  as  here  are  writ. — 

[Exit  Servant. 

Sirrah,  go  hire  me  twenty  cunning  cooks. 
Second  Serv.  You  shall  have  none  ill,  sir,  for   I  '11 

try  if  they  can  lick  their  fingers. 
Cap.   How  canst  thou  try  them  so  ?  5 

121.   not  >ne~\  Q,  F  ;  vie  not  Qq  4,  5  ;  fear}  Q,  care  F. 

Scene  IF. 

Hall  .  .  .]  Capell.  Enter  .  .  .]  substantially  Q,  F,  which  add  after 
Servingmen  "  two  or  three."  i.  Exit]  .  .  .  omitted  Q,  F.  3,  6.  Second 
Serv.]' Malone;  Ser.  Q,  F. 


I.    iv.     75.      "Inconstant    toy"    and  "'Give  me,'  quoth  I,"  Macbeth,   I. 

"  womanish  dread  "  occur  in  Brooke's  iii.  5)  as  unnecessary. 

poem. 

121.    GI'TV  !/tc~\    Pope,   followed  by  Scene  //. 

several  editors,  reads,   "Give  me,  Oh  2.   twenty  cunning  cooks']  The  im- 

give  me,  tell  not  me,"  and  so  Theo-  peluous  old  Capulet  characteristically 

bald,  reading  "tell  me  not."     Lett-  forgets    Tybalt's   death,    and    his    in- 

soin's  conjecture,  "O  give  't  me,  give 't  tention  (in.  iv.  27)  that  the  wedding 

me,"    is    held    by    Dyce    (comparing  should  be  almost  a  private  aflair. 


sc.  n.j  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  141 

Second  Serv.  Marry,  sir,  'tis  an  ill  cook  that  cannot 
lick  his  own  ringers :  therefore  he  that  cannot 
lick  his  fingers  goes  not  with  me. 

Cap.   Go,  be  gone. —  [/Lrit  Second  Servant. 

We  shall  be  much  unfurnish'd  for  this  time.  i  o 

What,  is  my  daughter  gone  to  Friar  Laurence  ? 

Nurse.  Ay,  forsooth. 

Cap.  Well,  he  may  chance  to  do  some  good  on  her : 
A  peevish  self-will'd  harlotry  it  is. 

Enter  JULIET. 

Nurse.  See    where   she  comes    from    shrift    with    merry 
look.  1 5 

Cap.   How  now,  my  headstrong  !    where  have  you  been 
gadding? 

Jul.  Where  I  have  learn'cl  me  to  repent  the  sin 
Of  disobedient  opposition 
To  you  and  your  behests,  and  am  enjoin'd 
By  holy  Laurence  to  fall  prostrate  here,  20 

To  beg  your  pardon.      Pardon,  I  beseech  you  ! 
Henceforward  I  am  ever  ruled  by  you. 

Cap.   Send  for  the  county  ;   go,  tell  him  of  this  : 

I  '11  have  this  knot  knit  up  to-morrow  morning. 

9.    l-'xit  .   .   .]  Capell.          15.   comes  .    .   .   look"}  O,  F;  commeth  from  con- 
fession ()  I. 

6.   ///   t'ook]    Steevens    quotes    the  any  so  peevish  to  imagine  the  moone 

adage,  as  given  in  Puttcnham's  Arte  either  capable  of  affection  or  shape  of 

of  English   Poesie    (1589):    "A   had  a   mistris.''     Perhaps    childishly   per- 

cooke   that   cannot    his   owne   fingers  verse  is  implied. 

lick."     It  is  also  given  in  Ileywood's          14.   harlotry]  Used  much  as  " slut  " 

Proverbs  (Spenser  Soc.  ed.  151).  might  be  used  at  a  later  date.      Com- 

14.  peevish']    may   mean    childish,  pare  the  description  of  Lady  Mortimer 

thoughtless,  foolish,   as  in  other  pas-  in  1  Henry  J  V.  in.  i.  198:  "  a  peevish 

sages  of  Shakespeare,  and  in  Lyly's  self-will'd  harlotry,  one  that  no  per- 

Endimion,  \.   i.  :   "There  never  was  suasion  can  do  good  upon." 


142  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  iv. 

Jul.   I  met  the  youthful  lord  at  Laurence'  cell,  2  5 

And  gave  him  what  becomed  love  I  might, 
Not  stepping  o'er  the  bounds  of  modesty. 

Cap.   Why,  I  am  glad  on  't ;   this  is  well :   stand  up  : 
This  is  as  't  should  be. — Let  me  see  the  county ; 
Ay,  marry,  go,  I  say,  and  fetch  him  hither. —         30 
Now,  afore  God,  this  reverend  holy  friar, 
All  our  whole  city  is  much  bound  to  him. 

Jul.  Nurse,  will  you  go  with  me  into  my  closet, 
To  help  me  sort  such  needful  ornaments 
As  you  think  fit  to  furnish  me  to-morrow?  35 

Lady   Cap.     No,    not    till     Thursday ;      there     is     time 
enough. 

Cap.    Go,  nurse,    go     with    her  : — we  '11    to    church     to- 
morrow. \Exeunt  Juliet  and  Nurse. 

Lady  Cap.   We  shall  be  short  in  our  provision  : 
'Tis  now  near  night. 

Cap.  Tush,  I  will  stir  about, 

And     all     things    shall    be    well,    I    warrant    thee, 
wife :  40 

Go  thou  to  Juliet,  help  to  deck  up  her ; 
I  '11  not  to  bed  to-night ;  let  me  alone  ; 

31.   reverend  holy]   Q,  F  ;   holy  reverent  Q    I,   Q  5.         36.  there  is~\  Q, 
there 's  F. 

2.6.   becomed]  becoming,  befitting.  39.   near   night]    Malone    observes 

33.   closet]    private   chamber,  as  in  that  immediately  after  Romeo's  part- 

Hainlet,  II.  i.  77.  ing   from   his   bride  at   daybreak  she 

36.    Lady  Cap.]  In  Q  I  :  went  to  the  Friar;  she  returns,   and 

I  pree  thee  doo,  good  Nurse  it   is   near    night.      Dramatic    time   is 

goe  in  with  her,  often   dealt   with   by   Shakespeare   as 

Ilelpe    her    to    sort    Tyres,  subject  to  dramatic  illusion. 

Rebatoes,  Chaines,  41.   up  her]  Hudson  adopts   Lett- 

And    I   will   come  unto  you  sonrs   conjecture   her  u/> ;    so   "trim 

presently."  her  up,"  iv.  iv.  25. 


sc.  in.]          ROMEO    AND   JULIET  143 

I  '11  play  the  housewife  for  this  once. — What,  ho  ! — 
They  are  all  forth  :  well,  I  will  walk  myself 
To  County  Paris,  to  prepare  him  up  45 

Against  to-morrow.      My  heart  is  wondrous  light, 
Since  this  same  wayward  girl  is  so  reclaim'd. 

[Exeunt. 

SCENE   III. —  The  Same.     Julie  fs  chamber. 

Enter  JULIET  and  Arursc. 

Jul.   Ay,  those  attires  are  best  ;  but,  gentle  nurse, 
I  pray  thee,  leave  me  to  myself  to-night ; 
For  I  have  need  of  many  orisons 
To  move  the  heavens  to  smile  upon  my  state, 
Which,  well  thou  know'st,  is  cross  and  full  of  sin.    5 

Enter  Lady  CAPULKT. 

Lady   Cap.    What,    are    you    busy,   ho  ?     need    you    my 
help? 

Jul.  No,  madam  ;  we  have  cull'd  such  necessaries 
As  are  behoveful  for  our  state  to-morrow: 
So  please  you,  let  me  now  be  left  alone, 
And  let  the  nurse  this  night  sit  up  with  you,         10 
For  I  am  sure  you  have  your  hands  full  all 
In  this  so  sudden  business. 

45.   him  itp\  F,  up  him  Q. 

Scene  ill. 
Juliet's  chamber]   Rowe.          6.   ho?  >u\'J  yon}  O,  F;  doo  you  need  Q  I. 

5.  sin]  In  O  i  Nurse  speaks,  Shakespeare  ;  Niw  En^,  Diet,  says : 

"  Well  theres  a  cleane  smocke  under  "Extremely  common  from  1400  to 

your  pillow,  and  so  good  niyht,"  1700;  but  used  since  only  by  ar- 

with  which  words  she  departs.  chaists."  The  only  example  alter 

S.   lehoreful\  useful.      Only  here  in  1736  is  cited  from  Carlyle's  l^'ralcrick. 


144  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  iv. 

Lady  Cap.  Good  night : 

Get  thee  to  bed,  and  rest,  for  thou  hast  need. 

\Exeunt  Lady  Capulet  and  Nurse. 

Jul.   Farewell ! — God  knows  when  we  shall  meet  again. 
I  have  a  faint  cold  fear  thrills  through  my  veins,      i  5 
That  almost  freezes  up  the  heat  of  life  : 
I  '11  call  them  back  again  to  comfort  me. 
Nurse  ! — What  should  she  do  here  ? 
My  dismal  scene  I  needs  must  act  alone.— 
Come,  vial. —  20 

What  if  this  mixture  do  not  work  at  all  ? 
Shall  I  be  married  then  to-morrow  morning? 
No,  no  : — this  shall  forbid  it : — lie  thou  there. — 

\^Laying  down  a  dagger. 
What  if  it  be  a  poison,  which  the  friar 
Subtly  hath  minister'd  to  have  me  dead,  25 

Lest  in  this  marriage  he  should  be  dishonour'd, 
Because  he  married  me  before  to  Romeo  ? 
I  fear  it  is  :  and  yet,  methinks,  it  should  not, 
For  he  hath  still  been  tried  a  holy  man. 

16.  life}  Q,  fire  F.  18.  Nttrse  !—}  Ilanmer  ;  Nurse,  Q,  F.  22. 
Shall  .  .  .  morning?}  Q,  F  ;  Must  I  of  force  be  married  to  the  Countie?  Q  I. 
23.  No  .  .  .  there}  Q,  F;  This  shall  forbid  it.  Knife,  lye  thou  there  (,)  I. 

15,  16.    /  .   .    .   life}     So     Brooke's  sec    IV.    i.     54.       Gifford    says    that 

poem:    "A  sweat  as  cold  as  moun-  daggers  were  worn  in  Shakespeare's 

taine  yse  pearst  through  her  slender  time  by   every  woman    in    England, 

skin."  They    certainly,    as    Steevens    shows 

20.    Come,    vial — ]    The    dramatic  by  several  quotations  which  speak  of 

pause  following  victim  this  (Ilanmer's)  "wedding    knives,"  formed    part    of 

arrangement  is  disregarded  by  Keight-  the  accoutrements  of  a  bride, 
ley,  who  emends  thus  :  29.   For  .   .   .   man}  Instead  of  this 

"Nurse  ! — What  should  she  do  here?  one  line  Q  I  has  two,  the  second  of 

My  dismal  scene  which    Sleevens    and    other    editors 

I  needs  must  act  alone.     Come,  vial,  make  part  of  the  text  : 

come  ! "  "He  is  a  holy  and  religious  Man  : 

23.  lie  thou  there}  Juliet  had  I  will  not  entertaine  so  bad  a 
alreadyprovided  herself  with  a  dagger  ;  thought." 


sc.  m.]         ROMEO   AND  JULIET  145 

How  if,  when  I  am  laid  into  the  tomb,  30 

I  wake  before  the  time  that  Romeo 

Come  to  redeem  me  ?   there  's  a  fearful  point ! 

Shall  I  not  then  be  stifled  in  the  vault, 

To  whose  foul  mouth  no  healthsome  air  breathes  in, 

And  there  die  strangled  ere  my  Romeo  comes  ?    3  5 

Or,  if  I  live,  is  it  not  very  like, 

The  horrible  conceit  of  death  and  night, 

Together  with  the  terror  of  the  place, 

As  in  a  vault,  an  ancient  receptacle, 

Where,  for  this  many  hundred  years,  the  bones    40 

Of  all  my  buried  ancestors  are  pack'd  ; 

Where  bloody  Tybalt,  yet  but  green  in  earth, 

Lies  festering  in  his  shroud ;  where,  as  they  say, 

At  some  hours  in  the  night  spirits  resort  : 

Alack,  alack,  is  it  not  like  that  I,  45 

So  early  waking,  what  with  loathsome  smells 

And  shrieks  like  mandrakes'  torn  out  of  the  earth, 

40.  lhis~\  Q,  these  F.         47.   /wfl/^vz/^T  ]  Capell  (Errata) ;  mandrakes  Q,  F. 

39.   As~\  Schmidt  takes  "As"  here  was  supposed  to  be   like   a   man,   to 

to  mean    "to   wit,"  and    cites  many  have  a  proportion  of  animal  life,  and 

other  passages  of  Shakespeare,  where,  (as  T.  Newton  in  his  Herhall  of  tlic 

he  maintains,  it  has  a  like  meaning.  />Y/VV,    1587,    notices)   possibly  to  be 

Steevens    supposes    that   the   charncl  engendered    by   dead    criminals    who 

at  Stratford-on-Avon  was  in  Shake-  had     been     executed      and     buried, 

speare's  mind   when  he   wrote   these  \Vhen     torn     from     the     earth     the 

lines.  mandrake   uttered    shrieks  ;    the   up- 

39.    rc.cf.ptade\    Rolfe  :     "  For    the  rooter    went    mad  ;    it   was    wise,    as 

accent  compare  Titus  Artdrotiictts,  i.  Bulleine  notices  (B^tlivark  of  Defend: 

i.    92:    'O    sacred   receptacle   of  my  against  Sickness,   1575),   to  tie  a  dog 

joys.'  "  to  the  root  and  let  him  be  the  victim, 

43.  festering\  becoming  loathsome  stopping  one's  cars  meamvhile   "  for 

by    corruption,   as    in   Henry    V.   iv.  feare  of  the  terrible  shriek  and  cry,'' 

iii.  88.  References  in  Elizabethan  dramatists 

47.    mandrakes"]     The     mandrake,  to  the  mandrake  and  its  terrors  are 

or  mandragora  (the  opiate  properties  not   uncommon.       See  2  Hcnrv    VI. 

of  which   are   spoken   of  in    Othello,  ill.  ii.    310:   "Would  curses  kill,   as 

III.    iii.    330),   having  a  forked  root,  doth  the  mandrake's  groan  ?" 
10 


146  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  iv. 

That  living  mortals,  hearing  them,  run  mad  : 
O,  if  I  wake,  shall  I  not  be  distraught, 
Environed  with  all  these  hideous  fears  ?  50 

And  madly  play  with  my  forefathers'  joints  ?  • 
And  pluck  the  mangled  Tybalt  from  his  shroud  ? 
And,  in  this  rage,  with  some  great  kinsman's  bone, 
As  with  a  club,  dash  out  my  desperate  brains  ? 
O,  look  !   methinks  I  see  my  cousin's  ghost  5  5 

Seeking  out  Romeo,  that  did  spit  his  body 
Upon  a  rapier's  point : — stay,  Tybalt,  stay  !— 
Romeo,  I  come  !   this  do  I  drink  to  thee. 

[S/ie  falls  tipon  her  bed  within  the  curtains. 


SCENE  IV. —  The  Same.     Hall  in  Capulefs  house. 

Enter  Lady  CAPULET  and  Nurse. 

Lady  Cap.   Hold,  take  these  keys,  and   fetch  more  spices, 
nurse. 

49.  0.  if  I  wake]  Hanmcr  ;  0  if  I -aalke  O,  F  ;  Or  if  I  -ccakc  Qq  4,  5  ;  Or 
if  1  rcalke  F  2.  57.  a]  O,  my  F,  his  ¥  2.  58.  Romeo  .  .  .  thee'}  Q  I, 
Pope  ;  Romeo,  Romeo,  Romeo,  hccres  drinke,  I  drinkc  to  thee  Q,  F.  She  .  .  . 
curtains]  Q  I  ;  omitted  Q,  F. 

Scene  IV. 

Hall   .   .   .]  Theobald  (.substantially). 

49.   Distraught}  distracted.  "  Romeo,    Romeo,    Romeo,    I   drink 

58.   Romeo,  I  cornel  FJyce  suggests  to  thee." 

that  hccns  drinke,    Q,    F,   may  be  a         58.    She     falls  .    .    .]     The      Cam- 

corrupted  stage-direction  foisted  into  bridge    editors    introduce    this  stage- 

the  text.      Daniel  writes  :   "I  incline  direction  from  Q   I.     Daniel  writes: 

also  to  believe  that  the  triple  repeti-  "The    space    'within    the    curtains,' 

lion  of  Romeo  in  those  editions  may  where  Juliet's  bed  is  placed,  was  the 

have  been  intended  as  an  addition  to  space  at  the  back  of  the  stage  proper, 

the    text    as    given    in    Q     I,    to    be  beneath   the   raised   stage   or   gallery 

murmured    by    Juliet    as     she     falls  which    served    for   a    balcony  .   .   .  ; 

asleep."      Johnson    read,     "Romeo,  this  was  divided  from  the  stage  proper 

here's    drink!     Romeo,     I    drink    to  by  a  traverse  or  curtain." 
thee!";      Knight      (Stratford     ed.), 


sc.iv.]         ROMEO   AND   JULIET  147 

Nurse.  They  call  for  dates  and  quinces  in  the  pastry. 

Enter  CAPULET. 

Cap.  Come,  stir,  stir,  stir  !   the  second  cock  hath  crow'd, 
The  curfew  bell  hath  rung,  'tis  three  o'  clock  : 
Look  to  the  baked  meats,  good  Angelica:  5 

Spare  not  for  cost. 

Nurse.  Go,  you  cot-quean,  go, 

Get  you  to  bed  ;  faith,  you  '11  be  sick  to-morrow 
For  this  night's  watching. 

Cap.   No,  not  a  whit  :  what,  I  have  watch'd  ere  now 

All  night  for  lesser  cause,  and  ne'er  been  sick.       10 

Lady  Cap.  Ay,   you   have   been    a    mouse-hunt   in   your 
time  ; 

4.  o']  Theobald  ;  a  O,  F.          10.  lesser]  Q,  Icssc  F,  a  lessc  F  2. 


2.  fas  try']  the  room  where  paste 
was  made  ;  so  pantry,  spicery,  laun- 
dry, buttery.  Staunton  quotes  from 
Breton,  A  Floorish  upon  Fancie 
(1582):  "The  pastrie,  mealehouse, 
and  the  roome  whereas  the  coales 
do  ly." 

4.  curfew    be!!]    Strictly    this    was 
an  evening  bell  (cottvre  feu)  rung  at 
eight  or  nine  o'clock.      Shakespeare 
uses  ftirfciv  correctly  in  Measure  for 
Measure,  iv.  ii.  78.      The  word  came 
to  be  used  of  other  ringings.     Thus 
in    Liverpool   Municipal    Records   <>f 
1673  and  1704  (quoted  in  A'eui  Eti^. 
Diet.} :   "  King  Curphew  all  the  yeare 
long  at  4  a  clock  in  the  morning  and 
eight  at  a  night."     Q  I  reads  :  "  The 
Curfewe  bell  hath  rung,  t'is  fourc  a 
cloeke. " 

5.  baked  meats']  pastry,  pies,  as  in 
Hamlet,  I.  ii.  180;  Palsgrave,  Lesclar- 
cissement     (1530):      "Bake     meate, 
viands  en  paste." 

5.  Angelica]  more  probably  Lady 
Capulet  (to  whom  "Spare  not  for 


cost ''  seems  appropriate)  than  the 
Nurse. 

6.  Nurse]  Z.  Jackson  suggested 
that  this  speech  belongs  to  Lady 
Capulet  ;  Singer  and  Hudson  adopt 
the  suggestion,  sending  the  Nurse  off 
the  stage  after  line  2.  But  on  such  an 
occasion  the  old  retainer  might  be 
familiar  with  her  master.  Q  I  makes 
Capulet  reply  to  this  speech:  "I 
warrant  thee  Nurse  I  have,"  etc. 

6  Go,  you  cot-quean"\  Theobald 
and  other  editors  read  Go  go,  t» 
emend  the  verse.  Cot  -  quean  i.-, 
primarily  the  housewife  of  a  labourer's 
cot :  thence  a  vulgar,  scolding  woman  ; 
used  of  a  man  it  means  a  man  who 
acts  the  housewife.  So  Roaring 
Girl  (1611)— Dekker,  Works,  1873, 
iii.  177:  "I  cannot  abide  the>e 
aperne  [apron]  husbands  ;  such  cot- 
tjiteancs." 

II.  mouse-hunt]  "Mouse/'  as  a 
term  of  endearment  for  a  woman, 
appears  in  Hamlet,  III.  iv.  183,  and 
elsewhere  in  Shakespeare  ;  mouse- 


148  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  iv. 

But  I  will  watch  you  from  such  watching  now. 

[Exeunt  Lady  Capulet  and  Nurse, 
Cap.  A  jealous-hood,  a  jealous-hood  ! — 

Enter  three  or  four  Serving-men ,  with  spits,  logs, 
and  baskets. 

Now,  fellow, 
What 's  there  ? 

First  Serv.   Things   for    the    cook,  sir,  but   I   know  not 

what.  1 5 

Cap.  Make  haste,  make  haste.  [Exit  first  Serv.'] — 

Sirrah,  fetch  drier  logs  : 

Call  Peter,  he  will  show  thee  where  they  are. 
Second  Serv.   I  have  a  head,  sir,  that  will  find  out  logs, 

And  never  trouble  Peter  for  the  matter.  [Exit. 

Cap.   Mass,  and  well  said;  a  merry  whoreson,  ha!         20 
Thou  shalt  be  logger-head. — Good  faith,  'tis  day : 
The  county  will  be  here  with  music  straight, 
For  so  he  said  he  would.  [Music  within. 

I  hear  him  near. — 
Nurse  ! — Wife  ! — What,  ho  ! — What,  nurse,  I  say  ! 

13.  jealous-hood]  hyphen  ¥  4.  14.  Jl-'/iat's]  F  2,  What  is  O,  1 1' hat  F. 
15.  First  Serv.J  Capell  ;  Fel.  [  =  Fellow]  n,  F.  16.  haste.  [Exit  .  .  .]] 
Capell,  haste  O,  haste,  F.  18.  Second  Serv.]  Capell  ;  Fel.  Q,  F.  19. 
Fxit]  Capell.  21.  faith}  Oq  4,  5,  F  2;  father  O,  F.  23.  Music 

within]  Capell  (line  22),  as  here  Cambridge  ;  Play  Musicke  (after  line  21) 

Q,  r- 

hunt  would,   accordingly,    mean  pur-  propen:-itics.      Cassio  (Dyce  notes),  in 

suer  of  women.      "Hunt,"  meaning  Othello,  calls   Bianca  a  "  fitchew  "- 

hunter,      is     not     uncommon  ;     thus  that  is,  a  polecat. 
Turbervile,  Book  of  Vencrie  (1575):         13.  jealous-hood^  What   are  called 

"  Then  the  chiefe  htin/c :  shall  take  his  «0;^£-formations  (made    for  an  occa- 

knife,  and  cut    off  the    deares   ryght  sion)  are  common  with  -hood.      Here 

foote."     Dyce  and    others,   however,  the  abstract,  equivalent  to  jealousy,  is 

explain  mouse-hunt  as  the  stoat,  and  put  for  the  concrete, 
attribute  to  the  animal  strong  sexual 


sc.  v.J  ROMEO    AND   JULIET  149 

Re-enter  Nurse. 

Go  waken  Juliet,  go,  and  trim  her  up;  25 

I  '11  go  and  chat  with  Paris  : — hie,  make  haste, 
Make  haste;   the  bridegroom  he  is  come  already  : 
Make  haste,  I  say.  {Exeunt. 

SCENE  V. —  The  Same.     Juliefs  chamber. 

Enter  Nurse. 

Nurse.   Mistress!   what,  mistress  !  Juliet!   fast,  I  warrant 

her,  she : 

Why,  lamb  !   why,  lady  !   fie,  you  slug-a-bed  ! 
Why,    love,    I    say  !    madam  !     sweet-heart !     why, 

bride ! 
What,  not   a    word  ?    you    take    your    pennyworths 

now; 

Sleep  for  a  week  ;  for  the  next  night,  I  warrant,     5 
The  County  Paris  hath  set  up  his  rest 

28.   Exeunt]  Capell. 


Juliet's  chamber]  Theobald  (who  adds  "Juliet  on  a  bed  ").     I.  she]  omitted 
F  2. 

I.   mistress  I  Juttef\    Daniel    reads  plains  the  Italian  restart,  "  to  set  up 

—  "  what,  mistress  Juliet !" — .  one's   rest,   to   make  a   rest,    or   play 

6.   set  a/>  /u's  rcsf\  A  metaphor  from  upon  one's  rest  at  primero.r>    Cotgrave 

primero,  a  game  at  cards  ;  as  I  under-  has  under  I\en-<ier :  "  11  y  reniioit  de 

stand  it,  the  stake  was  a  smaller  sum,  .w   re<tc,    He   set  his   whole   rest,    he 

the    rest   a    larger    sum,    which,    if   a  adventured    all    his    estate    upon   it.'' 

player  were   confident   (or  desperate)  1  lence  to  set  up  one's  rest  came   to 

might  all  be  set,  or  set  up,  that  is,  be  mean  to  be  resolved,  or  determined, 

wagered.      In    the    game    of  primero  For  many  examples,  see  Nares'  Gi'os- 

played  in  dialogue,  in  the  Dialogues  sarv.     The    phrase  occurs  in  several 

(p. 26) appended  to Minsheu's Spanish  passages   of  Shakespeare,    e.  '.   J/<.r- 

Dict.,  "  two  shillings  form  the  stake,  chant  of  Venice,  II.  it.  no. 
eight  shillings  the  rest.''     Florio  ex- 


150  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  iv. 

That  you  shall  rest  but  little. — God  forgive  me, 
Marry,  and  amen,  how  sound  is  she  asleep ! 
I  needs  must  wake  her. — Madam,  madam,  madam  ! 
Ay,  let  the  county  take  you  in  your  bed  ;  ro 

He  '11  fright  you  up,  i'  faith.      Will  it  not  be  ? 
What,   dress'd  !    and    in    your    clothes  !    and    down 

again  ! 

I  must  needs  wake  you.     Lady  !  lady  !  lady  ! 
Alas,  alas  !      Help,  help  !   my  lady  's  dead  ! 
O,  well-a-day,  that  ever  I  was  born  !  I  5 

Some  aqua-vitae,  ho  !      My  lord,  my  lady  ! 

Enter  Lady  CAPULET. 

Lady  Cap.  What  noise  is  here  ? 

Nurse.  O  lamentable  day  ! 

Lady  Cap.  What  is  the  matter? 

Nurse.  Look,  look  !      O  heavy  day  ! 

Lady  Cap.  O  me,  O  me  !      My  child,  my  only  life, 

Revive,  look  up,  or  I  will  die  with  thee.  20 

Help,  help  !   call  help. 

Enter  CArULET. 

Cap.   For  shame,  bring  Juliet  forth ;  her  lord  is  come. 
Nurse.  She  's  dead,  deceased,  she  's  dead  ;  alack  the  day  ! 
Lady  Cap.   Alack   the  day,  she  's  dead,  she  's  dead,  she  's 

dead  ! 

Cap.   Ha!   let  me  see  her.      Out,  alas!   she's  cold;        25 
Her  blood  is  settled  and  her  joints  are  stiff; 


sc.v.J          ROMEO   AND   JULIET  151 

Life  and  these  lips  have  long  been  separated  : 
Death  lies  on  her  like  an  untimely  frost 
Upon  the  sweetest  flower  of  all  the  field. 
Nurse.  O  lamentable  day  ! 

Lady  Cap.  O  woeful  time!  30 

Cap.   Death,  that  hath  ta'en  her  hence  to  make  me  wail, 

Ties  up  my  tongue,  and  will  not  let  me  speak. 

Enter  Friar  LAURENCE  and  PARIS,  with  Musicians. 

Fri.  Come,  is  the  bride  ready  to  go  to  church  ? 

Cap.   Ready  to  go,  but  never  to  return. 

O  son,  the  night  before  thy  wedding-day  35 

Hath  Death  lain  with  thy  wife  :  see,  there  she  lies, 

Flower  as  she  was,  deflowered  by  him. 

Death  is  my  son-in-law,  Death  is  my  heir ; 

My  daughter  he  hath  wedded  :   I  will  die, 

And  leave  him  all ;   life,  living,  all  is  Death's.        40 

Par.   Have  I  thought  long  to  see  this  morning's  face, 
And  doth  it  give  me  such  a  sight  as  this  ? 

Lady  Cap.   Accurst,  unhappy,  wretched,  hateful  day  ! 

32.  Enter  .  .  .]  "with  Musician.-,"  omitted  O,  E;  present  in  Q  4. 
36.  wife]  O,  E  ;  bride  n  i  ;  .svv]  E  2  ;  omitted  O,  E.  37.  deflowered]  O,  E 
(deflowred),  defloivrcd  now  V  2.  40.  all ;  life,  /ii'iii^]  Collier,  all  lijc 
living  Q,  E;  all,  life,  living  O  4.  41.  lo>i£\  E,  lone  (.,)  (alone). 

29.  field}  Pope  and  other  editors 
add  here  from  Q  i  the  line  "Accursed 
time  !  unfortunate  old  man  !  " 

32.  let  me  speak'}  In  Brooke's  poem     the  means  of  living,  as  where  Antonio 
Capulet  cannot  speak  for  grief;  Shake-     says  to  Portia  (Merchant  of  Venice,  V. 
speare  remembered  this,  but  only  to     286):    "Sweet  lady,   you  have  given 
produce  a  dramatic  touch  of  self-in-     me  life  and  living.'1 

congruity  in  the  old  man.  41.   thought     long~\      desired.        In 

33.  Fri.    Conic:'}  O  i  alone  of  early  Brooke's  poem,  anticipating  his  mar- 
editions  gives  this  line  to  Paris;   it  is  riage,    Paris'    "longing    hart    thinka 
followed  by  Staunton.  long  for    theyr    appoynted    howre 

36.   see]  This  added  word  of  E  2    s     (line  2274). 
also  found  in  (  )  i. 


152  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  iv. 

Most  miserable  hour  that  e'er  time  saw 

In  lasting  labour  of  his  pilgrimage  !  45 

But  one,  poor  one,  one  poor  and  loving  child, 

But  one  thing  to  rejoice  and  solace  in, 

And  cruel  death  hath  catch' d  it  from  my  sight ! 
Nurse.  O  woe  !   O  woeful,  woeful,  woeful  day  ! 

Most  lamentable  day,  most  woeful  day,  50 

That  ever,  ever,  I  did  yet  behold  ! 

O  day  !   O  day  !   O  day  !   O  hateful  day  ! 

Never  was  seen  so  black  a  day  as  this  : 

O  woeful  day,  O  woeful  day  ! 
Par.  Beguiled,  divorced,  wronged,  spited,  slain  !  5  5 

Most  detestable  death,  by  thee  beguiled, 

By  cruel  cruel  thee  quite  overthrown  ! 

O  love  !   O  life  !   not  life,  but  love  in  death  ! 
Cap.  Despised,  distressed,  hated,  martyr'd,  kill'd  ! 

Uncomfortable  time,  why  earnest  thou  now  60 

To  murder,  murder  our  solemnity  ? 

O  child  !   O  child  !   my  soul,  and  not  my  child  ! 

Dead  art  thou  !   alack  !   my  child  is  dead  ; 

And  with  my  child  my  joys  are  buried. 
Fri.  Peace,  ho  !  for  shame  !   confusion's  cure  lives  not    65 


48.  rati/iil]      Capell       conjectures  "O  woeful  day!     O  woeful,  woeful 
snatched.  day  ! " 

49.  0  iL'oc  !~\  Grant  White  suggests  56.  detestable]  Accent  on  first  syl- 
that  in  "this  speech  of  mock  heroic  lable,  as  in  v.  iii.  45. 

woe,"  Shakespeare  ridicules  the  trans-  58.    O  lore  !  .  .  .  deatJi\  I  doubtfully 

lation   of  Seneca's    Tragedies  (1581).  throw  out  the  suggestion:    "O  life! 

The  exclamatory  mode    of  love  and  not  life,  O  love  !  but  love  in  death  !  " 

grief  is  ridiculed  in  the  Pyramus  and  63.   Dead]     Theobald     and     many 

Thisbe    of    A     Midsummer    Nrjhf  s  editors  read,  "  Dead  art  thou  !  dead  "; 

Dream,  v.  i.  M alone  conjectures,  "Dead,  dead,  art 

54.    O   .   .   .    day .']    Daniel    adopts  thou  ! " 

Fleay's  conjecture  (to  emend  metre).  65.   !/~'cs]  Lettsom  conjectures  ties. 


sc.  v.]  UOMEO    AND   JULIET  153 

In  these  confusions.      Heaven  and  yourself 
Had  part  in  this  fair  maid;  now  heaven  hath  all, 
And  all  the  better  is  it  for  the  maid  : 
Your  part  in  her  you  could  not  keep  from  death ; 
But  heaven  keeps  his  part  in  eternal  life.  70 

The  most  you  sought  was  her  promotion, 
For  'twas  your  heaven  she  should  be  advanced  ; 
And  weep  ye  now,  seeing  she  is  advanced 
Above  the  clouds,  as  high  as  heaven  itself? 
O,  in  this  love,  you  love  your  child  so  ill,  75 

That  you  run  mad,  seeing  that  she  is  well : 
She  's  not  well  married  that  lives  married  long, 
But  she  's  best  married  that  dies  married  young. 
Dry  up  your  tears,  and  stick  your  rosemary 
On  this  fair  corse ;  and,  as  the  custom  is,  80 

In  all  her  best  array  bear  her  to  church ; 
For  though  fond  nature  bids  us  all  lament, 
Yet  nature's  tears  are  reason's  merriment. 
Cap.   All  things  that  we  ordained  festival, 

Turn  from  their  office  to  black  funeral ;  S  5 

Our  instruments  to  melancholy  bells, 

Si.   In  all}  Q  i  ;  And  in  Q,  F.          82.  fond}  F  2  ;  some  Q,  F  ;  us  all}  O, 
all  us  F. 

72.   advanced}  Advance  means  both  Dekkcr  (Works,  ed.  Grosart,  i.  129)  : 

promote  and  raise  or  lift  up,  as  often  ''Death    rudely    lay   with    her,    and 

in  Shakespeare  of  a  sword  or  a  stand-  spoild  her  of  a  maidenhead  .   .   .   the 

ard.      Furness  reads  advanced — .  rosemary   that   was   washt   in    sweete 

76.   ive/I :}  Rolfe:  "  Often  thus  used  water  to   set   out  the  Bridall  is  now 

of   the    dead."       Compare    IVinter's  wet  in  teares  to  furnish  her  buriall." 
Tale,   v.   i.  30,  and  Ant.   and  Cleop.          So.   custom}  See  iv.  i.  110,  note. 
II.  v.  32  :   "But,  sirrah,  mark  we  use         82.  fond}  foolish.      Knight  defends 

To  say  the  dead  are  well."  some  Q,  F,  some  impulses  of  nature, 

79.   rosemary}       The       evergreen,  comparing    Milton's    "some    natural 

emblematic    of  immortality,    and    of  tears."     Possibly   the    light    word    is 

remembrance,  used  at  both  weddings  soon   (misprinted  some)   in  the  sense, 

and  funerals.      See   note  on  Hamlet,  frequent  in  Shakespeare,  of  readily. 
IV.  v.   175  (ed.  Dowden).     Compare 


154  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACTIV. 

Our  wedding  cheer  to  a  sad  burial  feast, 

Our  solemn  hymns  to  sullen  dirges  change, 

Our  bridal  flowers  serve  for  a  buried  corse, 

And  all  things  change  them  to  the  contrary.         90 

Fri.   Sir,  go  you  in  ; — and,  madam,  go  with  him ; — 
And  go,  Sir  Paris ; — every  one  prepare 
To  follow  this  fair  corse  unto  her  grave. 
The  heavens  do  lour  upon  you  for  some  ill ; 
Move  them  no  more  by  crossing  their  high  will.    95 
[Exeunt  Capulet,  Lady  Capulet,  Paris, 

and  Friar. 

First  Mus.  Faith,   we    may   put  up   our   pipes,  and   be 
gone. 

Nurse.   Honest  good  fellows,  ah,  put  up,  put  up ; 

For,  well  you  know,  this  is  a  pitiful  case.          \Exit. 

First  Mus.   Ay,  by  my  troth,  the  case  may  be  amended. 

Enter  PETER. 
Peter.  Musicians,     O,     musicians,     "  Heart's     ease,    i  oo 

95.  Exeunt  .  .  .]  Theobald,  Exeunt  manet  Q,  Exeunt  manent  Musici  O  4, 
Exeunt  F.  96.  First  Mus.]  Capell,  Musi.  O,  Mu.  F.  98.  Exit] 
Theobald.  99.  First  Mus.]  Capell,  Fid.  O,  Mu.  F. 

88.   dirges]  The  transposing  of  all  again  in    Winter 's   Tale,   IV.  iv.  844, 

things  from  wedding  to  funeral  uses  where  by  case  the   Clown  means  his 

is  described  in  Brooke's  poem — "And  skin:   "though  my  case  be  a  pitiful 

Hymen  to  a  dirge,"  etc.  one,  I  hope  I  shall  not  be  flayed  out 

95.  Exeunt   .    .    .  ]    O    I     has    the  of  it." 

stage  -  direction,    "They  all   but   the         99.    Enter  Peter]  So  Qq  4,    5,  Ff; 

Nurse  goe  foorth,   casting  Rosemary  Qq  2,  3,  "Enter  Will  Kemp"  ;  Q  I, 

on    her   and    shutting    the    Curtens.  "Enter  Servingman."  Kemp,  the  suc- 

Enter  Musitions."  cessorof  Tarlton  in  comic  parts,  played 

96.  pipes}  "To  put  up  pipes"  was  Peter.      In    both    Q    1600  and  F  his 
also  used  figuratively;   "Poor  mens'  name  is  prefixed  to  speeches  of  Dog- 
children  may  put  up  their   pipes  for  berry  in  Much  Ado.      Before  Peter's 
being  gentils  in  their  day ;) — Blazon  of  entrance    Qq     2-5    have     Exit     (<>r 
Gen  fry,  Part  I.  Exeunt)  omnes. 

99.  case']  The  play  on  rase,  state  100.  "Heart's  ease"]  A  tune 
of  things,  and  case,  cover,  occurs  mentioned  in  Alisogonus,  a  play 


SC.  V.] 


ROMEO   AND   JULIET 


155 


Heart's  ease " :   O,  an   you  will   have  me  live, 

play  "  Heart's  ease." 
First  Mus.  Why  "  Heart's  ease  "  ? 
Peter.  O,  musicians,  because  my  heart  itself  plays 

"  My  heart  is  full  of  woe."      O,  play  me  some    105 

merry  dump,  to  comfort  me. 

First  Mus.  Not  a  dump  we ;  'tis  no  time  to  play  now. 
Peter.  You  will  not  then  ? 
First  Mus.  No. 

Peter.   I  will  then  give  it  you  soundly.  I  10 

First  Mus.  What  will  you  give  us  ? 
Peter.  No  money,  on   my  faith,  but  the  gleek ;    I 

will  give  you  the  minstrel. 
First  Mus.  Then  will  I  give  you  the  serving-creature. 

101.  an]  Pope;  and  Q,  F.  103.  First  Mus.]  Capell,  Fidler  Q,  Mu.  F. 
105.  of  tew]  Cjq  4,  5  ;  omitted  (),  F.  105,  106.  O  .  .  .  comfort  me.}  O 
omitted  F.  107.  First  Mus.]  Capell,  Minstrels  Q,  Mu.  F. 


as  early  as  1560;  the  music  is  given 
in  Naylor's  Shakespeare  and  Music 
(1896),  p.  193. 

105.  "  My  heart  is  full  of  li'oe''] 
The  burden  of  the  first  stanza  of  A 
Pleasant  A'ew  Ballad  of  Tivo  Lovers, 
printed    in    Sh.    Soc.    Papers,    I.    p. 
12:    "  Hey  ho!    my  heart  is  full  of 
\voe." 

106.  dump]  NCT.U  En^.  Did.  :  "  A 
mournful  or  plaintive  melody  or  SOUL;  ; 
also,  by  extension,  a  tune  in  general  : 
sometimes  apparently  used  for  a  kind 
of    dance.''       The    adjective     nici-ry 
is  a  comic  incongruity.      So  in    Tu-o 
Gentlemen   of    Verona,     ill.    ii.    85  : 
"to    their    instruments    Tune    a    de- 
ploring dump." 

109.  First  Mus.]  Here  and  in  later 
speeches  the  speaker  is  Minst.  or 
Min.  (Minstrel)  in  Oq  and  Mu.  in  F. 

112,  113.  tlic  ^leek  .  .  .  minstrel] 
"To  give  the  gleek"  meant  to  flout 
or  scoff.  "Where's  the  Bastard's 


braves  and  Charles  his  gleeks?" 
(scoffs),  1  Henry  VI.  III.  ii.  123  ; 
"  gleeking  and  galling  at  this  gentle- 
man," Henry  V.  v.  i.  78.  Turber- 
vile's  Ovid's  Epistles,  x.  vi.  :  "To 
him  alone  she  closely  clinges,  and 
gives  the  rest  the  gleake.'  There 
may  be  a  quibble  in  "give  the 
minstrel  "  on  gleeman  or  gligman. 
Minstrel  may  have  been  a  scoffing 
name,  because  of  the  inclusion  of 
wandering  "minstrels"  in  39  Eliza- 
beth 3  and  4  with  bearwards,  fencers, 
etc.,  as  "rogues,  vagabonds,  and 
sturdy  beggars.''  For  to  give  mean- 
ing to  represent  or  describe,  compare 
Corio/anus,  i.  ix.  55  :  "to  us  that 
,;/YT'r.'  you  truly.'' 

114.  Kn'ing-treature]  Perhaps  a 
more  contemptuous  title  than  serving- 
man.  In  The  Three  Ladies  of  London 
(1584^,  Simplicity  says,  "Faith  I'll 
be  a  sett'ing  -  creature"  ; 
Ilazlitt's  Dudsley's  Old  Plays,  x.  253. 


156  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACTIV. 

Peter.  Then  will  I  lay  the  serving-creature's  dagger    115 
on  your  pate.      I  will  carry  no  crotchets  :   I  '11 
re  you,  I  '11  fa  you.      Do  you  note  me  ? 

First  Mus.  An  you  re  us  and  fa  us,  you 
note  us. 

Second  Mus.   Fray  you,  put  up  your   dagger,  and    1 20 
put  out  your  wit. 

Peter.  Then  have  at  you  with  my  wit !  I  will  dry- 
beat  you  with  an  iron  wit,  and  put  up  my  iron 
dagger.  Answer  me  like  men  : 

When  griping  grief  the  heart  doth  wound,        125 

And  doleful  dumps  the  mind  oppress, 
Then  music  with  her  silver  sound — 
why   "  silver   sound  "  ?   why  "  music   with    her 
silver      sound  "  ?  —  What     say     you,     Simon 
Catling?  130 

First  Mus.  Marry,  sir,  because  silver  hath  a  sweet 
sound. 

nS.  An~\  Pope;  And  Q,  F.  122.  Then  .  .  .  wit']  continued  to  Sec. 
Mus.  Q,  F  ;  as  here  Q  4.  125-127.  When  .  .  .  sound]  verse  Q  I  ;  prose 
(,),  F.  125.  grief]  Q  I  ;  griefes  Q,  F.  126.  And  .  .  .  oppress]  O  i  ; 
omitted  Q,  F.  131.  First  Mus.]  I  Q  I,  Minst.  Q,  Mu.  F. 

116.   crotehets\  I  will  bear  none  of  "dry-beating."       But     probably    no 

your  whims  ;    the    same  play  on  the  quibble  is  intended, 

words    crotchets    and    note   occurs    in  122.   Jiave  at  you~\  Peter  takes/;// 

Much  Ado,  II.  iii.  58,  59.  oitl  not  as  meant,  i.e.  extinguish,  but 

116,  117.    /'//  re  yon,   /Y/faj<w]  as  the  opposite  at  put  up  (your  dagger), 

It  is  possible  that  (as   Ulrici  thinks)  and  so  draw,  unsheathe. 

([nibbles    are    continued    here.      Ray  122,  123.   dry-bcaf\  See  III.   i.   82, 

meant    to   befoul  ;   compare    Taming  note. 

of  the  S/ircii',   iv.   i.    3:    "Was  ever  125.    When  griping  grief]  From  a 

man    so    beaten  ?    was    ever    man    so  poem    by    Richard    Fdwards    in    the 

rayed!'"1     Fay  meant  to   cleanse,  as  Paradise   of  Daintic.    Devices.       See 

in  Burton,  Anat.  of  Melancholy  :  "To  also  the    poem    as    given    in    Percy's 

.  .  .  fay  channels."  See  New  Enq.  Diet.  Rcliques. 

for  other  examples  ;  and  compare  the  130.    Catling    A     small     lute     or 

phrase   "to    dust    one's    coat."     The  fiddle  string  of  catgut,  as  in    Troilas 

processes  of  befouling  and  cleansing  and  Cressida,  in.  iii.  306. 
might   both    be    accomplished    by   a 


sc.  v.]  ROMEO    AND   JULIET  157 

Peter.   Pretty! — What  say  you,  Hugh  Rebeck? 
Second  Mus.   I  say  "  silver  sound,"  because  musicians 

sound  for  silver.  I  3  5 

Peter.   Pretty  too ! — What  say  you,  James   Sound- 
post  ? 

TJiird  Hfus.   Faith,  I  know  not  what  to  say. 
Peter.  O,  I  cry  you   mercy ;  you   are  the  singer ;   I 

will  say  for  you.      It  is  "music  with  her  silver    140 
sound,"    because   musicians    have   no   gold   for 
sounding : 

Then  music  with  her  silver  sound 
With  speedy  help  doth  lend  redress. 

[Exit. 
First    Mns.      What     a     pestilent      knave     is     this    145 

same ! 

Second  Jlfus.   Hang    him,    Jack  ! — Come,    we  '11    in 
here  ;  tarry  for  the  mourners,  and  stay  dinner. 

\_E.vcunt. 

133.   Pretty!}    Pope    (from  O    I     Prctie};    Prates    O;    Pratcsf    n  3,     I-'. 
136.    Pretty  too!}   Pope,  from  O  i  ;  Prates  to  O  ;  Prat,   t  lo  O  3,  F.  141. 

musicians}    O,   F  ;  such  fe/lowcs  as  you  O   I  ;    no  ,^<'M]  <J,    I'"  ;  seldom  ^old 

0  I.          145.    First   Mus.]  Capell,    Min.   O,    Mu.    F.  147.   him,  Jaci:!} 

1  larmier  ;  liini  Jack,  (J,  F. 

133.   Pretty!}  Here  and  in  line  136  133.   Rebec!:}      a      three  -  stringed 

what    is    probably    a    misprint    of    O  fiddle. 

Prates,   modified   to   Pratest  in  (1  3,  136,    I  ,7.   Soundpost}  the  pillar  or 

F,     is     followed     by     some     editors,  piri;    \vhich    supports    the    belly   of   a 

Pratest'   Rowc  ;    Pratest!    Johnson;  stringed  instrument. 

Prates .'  Delius.     Compare  the  speech  145.  pestilent}     vexatious,     as     in 


158  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACTV. 

ACT  V 

SCENE   I. — Mantua.     A  Street. 

Enter  R.OMEO. 

Rom.  If  I  may  trust  the  flattering  truth  of  sleep, 

My  dreams  presage  some  joyful  news  at  hand  : 

My  bosom's  lord  sits  lightly  in  his  throne, 

And  all  this  day  an  unaccustom'd  spirit 

Lifts  me  above  the  ground  with  cheerful  thoughts.      5 

I  dreamt  my  lady  came  and  found  me  dead — 

Strange  dream,  that    gives    a    dead   man  leave  to 

think  ! — 
And  breathed  such  life  with  kisses  in  my  lips 

Mantua]  Rowe.          I.  tntth}  Q,  F;  eye  Q  I. 

I.  truth}    I    do    not    doubt    that  or     proposed;      Warburton,     ruth; 

Shakespeare  originally  wrote  eye  Q  I —  Collier  (MS.)  death;   Singer   soother 

"eye  of  sleep"    meaning  visions  of  (for    "truth    of");    White    sooth,   in 

the    night.       We   have    in    Sonnets,  the  sense  of  augury. 
xxxiii.,    "flatter  the   mountain  tops         3.   bosom's    lord]     Steevens     notes 

with  sovereign  eye";  in  Richard  III.  that,     in    Chester's     Loves     Martyr 

I.    iv.    271,    "if  thine   eye    be   not   a  (1601),    the    line     "How    his    deepe 

flatterer'''  ;  in  King  John,  II.  i.  503,  bosonies  lord  the  dutchess  thwarted" 

"the  flattering  table   of  her    eye";  is    explained    in     a     marginal     note 

compare  also  Julius    Cczsar,    iv.   iii.  "Cupid.'"'     Malone  compares  Othello, 

89,  90.      But,  as  Daniel  notes,  in  O  in.  iii.   448  :   "  Yield  up,  O  lore,  thy 

1   of  the  present  play  for  II.   ii.    141,  crown  and  hearted  throne.'''     Again, 

we  have   "  Too  flattering  true  to  be  in  Twelfth  Night,   I.    i.   38,  the  heart 

substantial"  ;  possibly  \vl\enjlatteri/ig  is  the  throne.,  the  lover  its  king  ;  and 

truth  here  was  substituted  for  flatter-  in  the  same  play,  n.  iv.  21,  "  the  seat 

ing  eye,    the  flattering  true   of    the  where    Love    is    throned "    seems    to 

earlier     passage      became    flattering  mean      the      heart.        Bosom's      lord 

tweet.       Mr.     Fleay    suggested    that  perhaps,     then,     means     Love  ;     but 

flattering    means    in    both    passages  perhaps,    more    obviously,    it    means 

(when  connected  with  true  and  truth]  the  heart. 

seeming.     It   is    an    old    saying    that         4.   this  day  aii\    Misprinted    "this 

morning    dreams     come    true  ;     can  an  day  an  "  in  F,   and  altered  in  F  2 

"flattering  truth   of  sleep"   mean   a  to  "  this  winged." 
flattering    morning-dream?      Various         8.   breathed}  Steevens  suggests  that 

emendations  of  truth  have  been  made  Shakespeare   remembered  Marlowe's 


sc.  i.]  ROMEO    AND   JULIET  159 

That  I  revived,  and  was  an  emperor. 

Ah  me!  how  sweet  is  love  itself  possess'd,  10 

When  but  love's  shadows  arc  so  rich  in  joy  ! 

Enter  BALTIIASAR,  booted. 

News  from  Verona!      How  now,  Balthasar ! 

Dost  thou  not  bring  me  letters  from  the  friar  ? 

How  doth  my  lady  ?      Is  my  father  well  ? 

How  fares  my  Juliet?  that  I  ask  again  ;  I  5 

For  nothing  can  be  ill  if  she  be  well. 
Bal.  Then  she  is  well,  and  nothing  can  be  ill : 

Her  body  sleeps  in  Capel's  monument, 

And  her  immortal  part  with  angels  lives. 

I  saw  her  laid  low  in  her  kindred's  vault,  20 

And  presently  took  post  to  tell  it  you  : 

O,  pardon  me  for  bringing  these  ill  news, 

Since  you  did  leave  it  for  my  office,  sir. 
Rom.   Is  it  even  so?   then  I  defy  you,  stars! — 

Thou     know'st     my    lodging:     get     me     ink     and 
paper,  2  5 

And  hire  post-horses  ;   I  will  hence  to-night. 
Bal.    I  do  beseech  you,  sir,  have  patience  : 

II.    F.nter  .   .   .]  Enter  Balthasar  his  man  booted  O  i  ;  Enter  Komeos  man 
Q,  F.  15.  fares  my  Juliet]  O  i  ;  doth  my  Lady  Ju'i,  t  O.   F.  19.    lire.-} 

Q,  live  F.  24.  even}  F,  in  O,  /,•//  Collier  ;  d,jy  you}  Pope  ;  defie  my  Q  I  : 
denie you  Q,  F.  27.  1  .  .  .  patioicc\  O,  F  ;  Pardon,  me  Sir,  I  n'lll  not 
leave  you  tints,  Q  I. 

line   in   Hero    ana    Lcatider  \    "He  Capels'   monument.'"      Shakespeare 

kiss'd  her  and  breathed  life  into  her  found    Capel    and    Capulct    used    in- 

lips."     That  poem  was  not  published  discriminately     in      Brooke's      poem 

till  1598.  (Malone). 

17.  well]  See  IV.  v.  76,  note.  24.   </-'/V]  Deny  may  be  ri^ht,  in  the 

18.  Cafcl's}  Capels  Q,  F.      Rolfe  :  sense  disown,  repudiate.      Delias  cites 
"  CafcFs    seems    better     here     thin  J\in^  John,    \.  i.  252:    "I    deny  the 
Capels',  on  account  of  the  omission  devil.''     See  v.  iii.  in. 

of  the  article  ;  but  v.  iii.    127,    '  the 


160  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  v. 

Your  looks  are  pale  and  wild,  and  do  import 
Some  misadventure. 

Rom.  Tush,  thou  are  deceived  ; 

Leave  me,  and  do  the  thing  I  bid  thee  do.  30 

Hast  thou  no  letters  to  me  from  the  friar  ? 

Bal.  No,  my  good  lord. 

Rom.  No  matter  :  get  thee  gone, 

And  hire  those  horses ;   I  '11  be  with  thee  straight. 

\Exit  Balthazar. 

Well,  Juliet,  I  will  lie  with  thee  to-night. 
Let 's     see     for    means :  —  O     mischief,    thou     art 
swift  3  5 

To  enter  in  the  thoughts  of  desperate  men  ! 
I  do  remember  an  apothecary, 
And  hereabouts  he  dwells,  which  late  I  noted 
In  tatter'd  weeds,  with  overwhelming  brows, 
Culling  of  simples  ;  meagre  were  his  looks,  40 

Sharp  misery  had  worn  him  to  the  bones  : 
And  in  his  needy  shop  a  tortoise  hung, 
An  alligator  stuff'd  and  other  skins 
Of  ill-shaped  fishes  ;  and  about  his  shelves 
A  beggarly  account  of  empty  boxes,  45 

Green  earthen  pots,  bladders  and  musty  seeds, 

33.   Exit]  Rowe  ;  after  lord,  line  32,  Q,  F.         38.  Ac]  F  2,  a  Q,  omitted 
F  ;  whicJi}  Q,  F  ;  wJioni  Q  i. 

39.   overwhelming}    a    word    which  Mode,   plate  iii.      So,  too,   in  Garth's 

Shakespeare    connects  with  brows  in  Dispensary. 

Venus  and  Adonis,  Vu\o.  183, and  Henry         45.   empty  boxes}  Some  details  and 

V.  ill.  i.  ii.  words    are    imported    into    the    play 

43.   alligator}    Malone    notes    that  from    the    corresponding    description 

Nash    in    Have  with    You,  to  Saffron  in  Brooke's  poem. 
Waldcn,  1596,  refers  to  an   "  apothe-         46.    Green  earthen  pots}    Halliwell 

cary's  crocodile  or  stuffed  alligator"  quotes  a  letter,  August  1594,  from  Sir 

as  part  of  his   shop    properties.       It  J.  Caesar  showing  that  the  manufac- 

appears    in  Hogarth's  Marriage  a  la  lure  of  these  pots  was  carried  on  in 


sc.  i.]  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  K;I 

Remnants  of  packthread,  and  old  cakes  of  roses, 

Were  thinly  scatter'd  to  make  up  a  show. 

Noting  this  penury,  to  myself  I  said, 

An  if  a  man  did  need  a  poison  now,  50 

Whose  sale  is  present  death  in  Mantua, 

Here  lives  a  caitiff  wretch  would  sell  it  him. 

O,  this  same  thought  did  but  forerun  my  need, 

And  this  same  needy  man  must  sell  it  me. 

As  I  remember,  this  should  be  the  house :  5  5 

Being  holiday,  the  beggar's  shop  is  shut. — 

What,  ho  !  apothecary  ! 

Enter  Apothecary. 

Ap.  Who  calls  so  loud  ? 

Rom.  Come  hither,  man.      I  see  that  thou  art  poor  ; 
Hold,  there  is  forty  ducats:   let  me  have 
A  dram  of  poison,  such  soon-speeding  gear  60 

As  will  disperse  itself  through  all  the  veins 
That  the  life-weary  taker  may  fall  dead, 
And  that  the  trunk  may  be  discharged  of  breath, 
As  violently  as  hasty  powder  fired 
Doth  hurry  from  the  fatal  cannon's  womb.  65 

Ap.   Such  mortal  drugs  I  have  ;  but  Mantua's  law 
Is  death  to  any  he  that  utters  them. 

50.  .-///  if]  O,  F  ;  And  if  (^  i,  O  5.          57.    Enter  .   .    .]  Q  I,  F  ;  omitted 
Q.          60.   soon-sfccdtHg]  hyphen  F  4. 

England    at    that    date.     They    \s  ere  60.   soon  •  .v/v  rch'/ij    ,!>var]      Rolfe  : 

"drunk  in  by  the  gentlemen  of  the  "quick -dispatching    stuff."       From 

Temple."  Brooke's    poem,    "  Faire    syr    (quoth 

51.  present]    immediate.       Knight  he)    be    sure    this    is    the    speeding 
says    there  was    no    law    in   England  gere." 

against  the  sale  of  poisons,  but  (quot-  67.   any  he}  Delius  cites  Tawing  oj 

ing  Raleigh's  Discourse  oj  Tenures  in  the  S/uru',   ill.    ii.   256:    "I'll  bring 

proof)  that  such  a  law  was  in  force  in  mine    action    on    the    proudest    he." 

Spain  and  Portugal.  Other  examples  could  be  added. 

T  T 


162  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACT  v. 

Rom.  Art  thou  so  bare,  and  full  of  wretchedness, 
And  fear'st  to  die  ?  famine  is  in  thy  cheeks, 
Need  and  oppression  starveth  in  thy  eyes,  70 

Contempt  and  beggary  hangs  upon  thy  back  ; 
The  world  is  not  thy  friend  nor  the  world's  law : 
The  world  affords  no  law  to  make  thee  rich  ; 
Then  be  not  poor,  but  break  it,  and  take  this. 

Ap.   My  poverty,  but  not  my  will,  consents.  75 

Rom.   I  pay  thy  poverty,  and  not  thy  will. 

Ap.   Put  this  in  any  liquid  thing  you  will, 

And  drink  it  off;  and,  if  you  had  the  strength 
Of  twenty  men,  it  would  dispatch  you  straight. 

Rom.  There     is     thy     gold,     worse     poison     to     men's 
souls  80 

Doing  more  murder  in  this  loathsome  world 
Than   these   poor  compounds  that  thou  mayst  not 

sell: 

I  sell  thee  poison,  thou  hast  sold  me  none. 
Farewell :   buy  food,  and  get  thyself  in  flesh. — 
Corne,  cordial  and  not  poison,  go  with  me  85 

To  Juliet's  grave,  for  there  must  I  use  thee. 

{Exeunt. 

71.  Contempt  .  .  .  back'}  Q,  F;  Upon  thy  backe  Jiangs  ragged  Miserie  Q  \. 
76.  fay]  Q  I,  Qq  4,  5  ;  pray  Q,  F.  80.  There  is]  Q,  There's  F.  8l. 
murder]  Q,  F  ;  murders  Qq  4,  5.  84.  thyself  iii]  Q,  F  ;  thee  into  Q  I. 

70.  starvr.th]  are  hungry.    Changed  but  the  line  should  be  read  in  connec- 

by  Rowe  (following  Otway's  version  lion  with  "take  this,"  line  74. 
in   Cains  Man' us)  to  s/arcf/i.      Pope         77.   Put    Ihis]    Steevens    suggests 

read   stare   ivitliin  ;    slarlclh    in   has  that  Shakespeare  had  not  quite  forgot 

been  suggested.  a  somewhat  similar  commendation  of 

76.  f>ay]  Knight  retains  pray  Q,  F;  his  poison  by  the  Potccary  in  Chaucer's 

Fardoncrcs  Talc, 


sc.  ii.]  ROMEO   AND   JULIET  163 


SCENE  II. —  Verona,     friar  Laurence's  cell. 

Enter  Friar  JOHN. 
Fri.  John.   Holy  Franciscan  friar  !  brother,  ho  ! 

Enter  Friar  LAURENCE. 

Fri.  Lau.  This  same  should  be  the  voice  of  Friar  John. — 
Welcome  from  Mantua :  what  says  Romeo  ? 
Or,  if  his  mind  be  writ,  give  me  his  letter. 

Fri.  John.   Going  to  find  a  bare-foot  brother  out,  5 

One  of  our  order,  to  associate  me, 
Here  in  this  city  visiting  the  sick, 
And  finding  him,  the  searchers  of  the  town, 
Suspecting  that  we  both  were  in  a  house 
Where  the  infectious  pestilence  did  reign,  10 

Seal'd  up  the  doors,  and  would  not  let  us  forth  ; 
So  that  my  speed  to  Mantua  there  was  stay'd. 

Fri.  Lau.  Who  bare  my  letter  then  to  Romeo  ? 

Fri.  Joint.   I  could  not  send  it, — here  it  is  again, — 

Nor  get  a  messenger  to  bring  it  thee,  i  5 

So  fearful  were  they  of  infection. 

Fri.  Lau.  Unhappy  fortune  !   by  my  brotherhood, 

Verona]  Dyce.     Friar  Laurence's  cell]  Capell. 

5.  bare-foot  brother}  In  his  account  9.  he  use'}  Delius  notes  that,  accord- 
of     the     Franciscan    brothers    going  ing  to  both   Brooke  and  Painter,  the 
abroad  in  company  one  with  another  "house"  was  the  convent  to  which 
Shakespeare  follows  Brooke's  poem  ;  the  bare-foot  brother  belonged. 

but  Brooke  represents  the  pestilence  n.  6Va/V«/]  a  duty  of  the  English 

as  at  Mantua.  constable.      Hcrford  :    "  The  Middle- 

6.  associate]  accompany.     So  Hall,  sex  Sessions  Rolls  contain  cases  of  the 
Chronicle  (quoted  in  New  Eng.  Diet.]:  trial  of  constables  for  neglecting  this 
"  He  should  have  associated  him  in 

his  journey." 


164  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACT  v. 

The  letter  was  not  nice,  but  full  of  charge 

Of  dear  import ;  and  the  neglecting  it 

May  do  much  danger.      Friar  John,  go  hence ;      20 

Get  me  an  iron  crow,  and  bring  it  straight 

Unto  my  cell. 

Fri.  John,   Brother,  I  '11  go  and  bring  it  thee.  \Exit. 

Fri.  Lau.  Now  must  I  to  the  monument  alone ; 

Within  this  three  hours  will  fair  Juliet  wake:        25 
She  will  beshrew  me  much  that  Romeo 
Hath  had  no  notice  of  these  accidents ; 
But  I  will  write  again  to  Mantua, 
And  keep  her  at  my  cell  till  Romeo  come: 
Poor  living  corse,  closed  in  a  dead  man's  tomb  !      30 

[Exit. 

SCENE  III. —  The  Same.     A  churchyard ;   in  it  a 
monument  belonging  to  the  Capulets. 

Enter  PARIS  and  his  Page,  bearing  flowers  and  a  torch. 

Par.   Give  me  thy  torch,  boy :  hence,  and  stand  aloof: — 
Yet  put  it  out,  for  I  would  not  be  seen. 
Under  yond  yew-trees  lay  thee  all  along, 

A  churchyard  .  .  .]  Rowe  (substantially).  Enter  .  .  .]  Capell  (sub- 
stantially) ;  Enter  Countie  Paris  and  his  Page  with  flowers  and  sweete  water 
Q  I  ;  Enter  Paris  and  his  Page  Q,  F.  I.  aloof]  Q,  aloft  F.  3.  yond 
yew-trees'}  Pope;  this  Elv-tree  O  I;  yond  young  trees  Q,  F;  along}  (), 
¥  ;  alone  F  2. 

18.   nice}    trivial;    see    in.   i.    160 ; 

"  full  of  charge,"  full  of  importance  ;  Scene  III. 

so    "parcels    of     charge,"     Winter's 
Tale,  iv.  iv.  261.  A  churchyard  .   .   .]  Brooke  in  his 

26.   beshrew}  blame  severely.     Ful-     poem   "refers  to  the  Italian   custom 
ler,  Holy  and  Profane  State,   IV.   ix.      of     building     large    family    tombs " 
280  :   "  lie  hath  just  cause  to  beshrciv     (Rolfe). 
his  fingers." 


sc.  in.]         ROMEO   AND   JULIET  165 

Holding  thine  ear  close  to  the  hollow  ground  ; 
So  shall  no  foot  upon  the  churchyard  tread,  5 

Being  loose,  unfirm,  with  digging  up  of  graves, 
But  thou  shalt  hear  it  :   whistle  then  to  me, 
As  signal  that  thou  hear'st  something  approach. 
Give  me  those  flowers.      Do  as  I  bid  thee  ;  go. 
Page.  [Aside.]   I  am  almost  afraid  to  stand  alone  i  o 

Here  in  the  churchyard  ;  yet  I  will  adventure. 

[Retires. 
Par.   Sweet  flower,  with  flowers  thy  bridal  bed  I  strew,  — 

O  woe  !   thy  canopy  is  dust  and  stones  — 
Which  with  sweet  water  nightly  I  will  dew, 

Or,  wanting  that,  with  tears  distill'd  by  moans  :    I  5 
The  obsequies  that  I  for  thee  will  keep 
Nightly  shall  be  to  strew  thy  grave  and  weep. 

[The  Page  whistles. 

The  boy  gives  warning  something  doth  approach. 
What  cursed  foot  wanders  this  way  to-night, 
To  cross  my  obsequies  and  true  love's  rite?  20 

What,  with  a  torch  !  —  muffle  me,  night,  awhile. 

[Retires. 

4.  Holding  //&/w]  Capell  ;  Keeping  thine  O  I  ;  Holding  thy  O,  F.  10. 
[Aside]]  Capell.  11.  Retires]  Capell  ;  Exit  F  2;  omitted  (,),  F.  12, 
13.  strew,  —  .  .  .  stones  —  ]  strew:  .  .  .  stones,  O,  F.  I?.  The  Page 

whistles]  Whistle  Boy  Q,  F.  18.  warning  something}  Collier  ;  warning, 
something  Cj,  F.  19.  way]  Q,  rcayes  F.  2O.  rite]  Pope  (ed.  2);  right 
O,  F;  rites  Q  I.  21.  Retires]  Capell. 


Dyce    takes    "stand"   to          14.   sweet   ivater]  water  perfumed, 

mean  remain.  as    in    Titus    Androniciis,    n.    iv.    0. 

12,    13.   strew,—    .     .     .     stones  —  ]  See    stage-direction    (.,>   I   at   opening 

The  pointing,  which  differs  little  from  of  this  scene. 

that    of   the   Cambridge  Shakespeare,          1  8.   warning     something]     Several 

is  intended  to  make  the  second  line  editors  point  as  U,  F. 
of  this  sonnet-like  sextet  parenthetic, 


166  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ 


ACT  V. 


Enter  ROMEO  and  BALTHASAR,  with  a  torch,  mattock,  etc. 

Rom.  Give  me  that  mattock  and  the  wrenching  iron. 
Hold,  take  this  letter ;  early  in  the  morning 
See  thou  deliver  it  to  my  lord  and  father. 
Give  me  the  light :  upon  thy  life  I  charge  thee,    2  5 
Whate'er  thou  hear'st  or  seest,  stand  all  aloof, 
And  do  not  interrupt  me  in  my  course. 
Why  I  descend  into  this  bed  of  death 
Is  partly  to  behold  my  lady's  face, 
But  chiefly  to  take  thence  from  her  dead  finger    30 
A  precious  ring,  a  ring  that  I  must  use 
In  dear  employment :  therefore  hence,  be  gone  : 
But  if  thou,  jealous,  dost  return  to  pry 
In  what  I  farther  shall  intend  to  do, 
By  heaven,  I  will  tear  thee  joint  by  joint,  35 

And  strew  this  hungry  churchyard  with  thy  limbs : 
The  time  and  my  intents  are  savage-wild, 
More  fierce  and  more  inexorable  far 
Than  empty  tigers  or  the  roaring  sea. 
Bal.   I  will  be  gone,  sir,  and  not  trouble  you.  40 

Rom.  So  shalt  thou  show  me  friendship.       Take    thou 
that: 

Enter  .  .  .]  Malone,  from  Theobald  and  Capell  ;  Enter  Romeo  and  Peter 
Qq  2,  3,  Ef ;  Enter  Romeo  and  Balthazar  his  man,  Oq  4,  5  ;  Enter  Romeo 
and  Balthasar,  with  a  torch,  a  mattocke,  and  a  crow  of  yron  O  i.  34. 
farther]  Q,  further  F.  37.  savage -wild]  hyphen,  Steevens.  40,  43. 
Bal.]  Qq  4,  5  ;  Pet.  Q,  F.  40.  you]  ¥,}'£  Q.  41.  show  me  friendship] 
Q,  F  ;  win  my  favour  Q  I. 

21.   Balthasar]     Peter     in     Q,     F.  portant,  as  in  1  Henry  IV.  IV.  i.  34: 

Collier  suggests  that  Kemp  doubled  "  so  .   .   .   dear  a  trust." 

his    part,     acting     both     Peter    and  33.  jealous]  suspicious,   as  often  in 

Balthasar,  whence  the  confusion.  Shakespeare. 

32.   dear]   precious  in    import,   im- 


ROMEO   AND   JULIET  167 

Live,  and  be  prosperous  ;   and  farewell,  good  fellow. 
BaL  [Aside.]   For  all  this  same,  I  '11  hide  me  hereabout  : 

His  looks  I  fear,  and  his  intents  I  doubt.      [Retires. 
Rom.   Thou  detestable  maw,  thou  womb  of  death,         45 

Gorged  with  the  dearest  morsel  of  the  earth, 

Thus  I  enforce  thy  rotten  jaws  to  open, 

{Opens  the  tomb. 

And,  in  despite,  I  '11  cram  thce  with  more  food  ! 
Par.   This  is  that  banish'd  haughty  Montague, 

That     murder'd     my     love's     cousin,     with     which 
grief  50 

It  is  supposed  the  fair  creature  died  ; 

And  here  is  come  to  do  some  villanous  shame 

To  the  dead  bodies  :    I  will  apprehend  him.  — 

\Comes  forivard. 

Stop  thy  unhallow'd  toil,  vile  Montague  ! 

Can  vengeance  be  pursued  further  than  death  ?     55 

Condemned  villain,  I  do  apprehend  thee: 

Obey,  and  go  with  me  ;   for  thou  must  die. 
Rom.   I  must  indeed  ;   and  therefore  came  I  hither. 

Good  gentle  youth,  tempt  not  a  desperate  man  ; 

Fly     hence     and     leave     me  :     think     upon     these 
gone  ;  60 

Let  them  affiright  thee.      I  beseech  thee,  youth, 

43.  [Aside]]  Capell.          44.  Retires]  Ilunmcr.  Kxit  F  2.          47.  Open.-.  .  .] 
Capell    substantially  ;    Cambridge    after    line    48.  53.    Conies    forward] 

draws  and  rushes  forward  Capell  (after  line  54).         60.   thisc']  (J,  t/wf*:  F. 

45.   detestable]   accented    as    in   IV.      thinks    a    trap-door    may    have    been 


47.   Opens  the  tomb]    Daniel   sup-  brought    Juliet    up  in  his  arms   from 

poses    that    the    tomb  was  placed   in  the  vault  beneath  the  stage. 

the    space    under    the    gallery  at  the  48.   ctcsfitt]    Keiglnley    conjectures 

back    of   the    stage   proper.      Malone  requite. 


168  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACT  v. 

Put  not  another  sin  upon  my  head 

By  urging  me  to  fury :   O,  be  gone  ! 

By  heaven,  I  love  thee  better  than  myself, 

For  I  come  hither  arm'd  against  myself:  65 

Stay  not,  be  gone ;  live,  and  hereafter  say 

A  madman's  mercy  bid  thee  run  away. 

Par.   I  do  defy  thy  conjurations 

And  apprehend  thee  for  a  felon  here. 

Rom.  Wilt    thou     provoke     me  ?     then     have    at    thee, 
boy  !  [  They  fight.      7  o 

Page.  O  Lord,  they  fight !      I  will  go  call  the  watch. 

{Exit. 

Par.  O,  I  am  slain  ! — \_Fal I s\  If  thou  be  merciful, 

Open  the  tomb,  lay  me  with  Juliet.  [Dies. 

Rom.   In  faith,  I  will. — Let  me  peruse  this  face : 

Mercutio's  kinsman,  noble  County  Paris  !  7  5 

What  said  my  man  when  my  betossed  soul 

Did  not  attend  him  as  we  rode  ?      I  think 

He  told  me  Paris  should  have  married  Juliet : 

Said  he  not  so  ?   or  did  I  dream  it  so  ? 

Or  am  I  mad,  hearing  him  talk  of  Juliet,  80 

To  think  it  was  so? — O,  give  me  thy  hand, 

One  writ  with  me  in  sour  misfortune's  book  ! 

62.   Put}  O,   F  ;  Htape  O   i  ;  Pull  Rowe.  67.   hid}    O,   F  ;  bad  O  5. 

68.  conjurations}  Q  i  ;  comniiration  Q  ;  cotnmisseration  O  3.  F.  69.  appre- 
hend} Q,  F  ;  doc  attach  Q  I.  70.  They  fight]  Q  I.  71.  Page]  Qq  4,  5  ; 
omitted  Qq  2,  3  ;  Pet.  F  ;  Boy  Q  I.  Exit]  Capell.  72.  [Falls]]  Capell. 
73.  Dies]  Theobald.  82.  book!}  Capell,  booke,  Q,  hooL-e.  F. 

62.  Put}  Capell  conjectures  Pluck,  and  reads  commiseration.     Mommsen 

68.  conjurations}  solemn  entreaties,  conjectures  comminution. 

as  in  Henry  V.  i.  ii.   29.     A  passage  71.     O    .    .    .    watc/i}     Printed     in 

in  Painter's  tale  misled  Steevens  into  italics,    without    prefix,    in   Oq    2,    3. 

supposing  that  it  meant  magical  in-  Mommsen    supposes    that    the    italics 

cantations.      Collier  (MS.)  omits  thy  indicate    that    it   was    spoken   behind 

the  scenes. 


ROMEO   AND   JULIET 


169 


I  '11  bury  thcc  in  a  triumphant  grave ; 
A  grave  ?      O,  no,  a  lantern,  slaughter'd  youth  ; 
For  here  lies  Juliet,  and  her  beauty  makes  85 

This  vault  a  feasting  presence  full  of  light. 
Death,  lie  thou  there,  by  a  dead  man  interr'd. — 

{Laying  Paris  in  the  tomb. 
How  oft  when  men  are  at  the  point  of  death 
Have  they  been  merry !   which  their  keepers  call 
A  lightning  before  death  :   O,  how  may  I  90 

Call  this  a  lightning? — O  my  love!    my  wife! 
Death,  that  hath  suck'd  the  honey  of  thy  breath, 
Hath  had  no  power  yet  upon  thy  beauty  : 
Thou  art  not  conquer'd  ;  beauty's  ensign  yet 
Is  crimson  in  thy  lips  and  in  thy  cheeks,  95 

And  death's  pale  flag  is  not  advanced  there. — 
Tybalt,  liest  thou  there  in  thy  bloody  sheet  ? 

87.    Laying  .   .   .]  Theobald.          94.   art}  O,  arc  V. 


84.  lantern}  used  in  the  archi- 
tectural sense  ;  a  structure  on  the  top 
of  a  dome,  or  the  roof  of  a  hall  for  the 
admission  of  light  ;  a  tower  the 
interior  of  which,  open  to  view  from 
the  ground,  is  lighted  from  an  upper 
tier  of  windows  (e.g.  the  lantern  of 
Ely),  also  a  light  open  erection  on 
the  top  of  a  tower.  Steevens  cites 
Holland's  Pliny,  35.  12:  "hence 
came  the  louvers  and  Ian  femes  reared 
over  the  roofes  of  temples.'1 

86.  presence}     presence  -  chamber, 
state-room,   as  in  Richard  II.    I.    iii. 
289. 

87.  Death}    Dyce    (ed.    2)    adopts 
Lettsom's  conjecture  Dead.     Romeo 
brings    "Death,"    in    the    person    of 
Paris,  into  the  presence-chamber. 

87.  a  dead  man}  For  Romeo  him- 
self already  has  parted  with  life. 
Clarke  aptly  compares  Keats,  Isa- 
bel/a : 


"  So  the  two  brothers  and  their 
murder  d  man 

Rode  past  fair  Florence." 

90.  lightning}  Ray  gives  as  a  pro- 
verbial saying,  "It's  a  lightning 
before  death."  Steevens  quotes  an 
example  from  The  Second  Part  of  The 
Downfall  of  Robert,  Earl  of  Hunting- 
don (1601).  For  other  examples,  and 
a  fine  simile  from  Daniel's  Ciril  li'ars, 
see  Nares'  Glossary. 

96.  death's  pale  Jlag}  Steevens  com- 
pares Daniel's  Complaint  of  Rosamond 
(1592),  lines  773-775  :. 

"  And    nought-respecting  death  (the 

last  of  paines) 
I'lac'd  his  pale  colours  (th1  ensigne 

of  his  might) 
Upon  his  new-got  spoyle  before  his 

right." 

97.  Tybalt}  This  address  to  Tybalt 
had  its  suggestion  in  Hrouke's  poem. 


170  ROMEO   AND   JULIET         [ACT  v. 

O,  what  more  favour  can  I  do  to  thee 

Than  with  that  hand  that  cut  thy  youth  in  twain 

To  sunder  his  that  was  thine  enemy  ?  I  oo 

Forgive  me,  cousin  ! — Ah,  dear  Juliet, 

Why  art  thou  yet  so  fair  ?  shall  I  believe 

That  unsubstantial  Death  is  amorous, 

And  that  the  lean  abhorred  monster  keeps 

Thee  here  in  dark  to  be  his  paramour?  105 

For  fear  of  that  I  still  will  stay  with  thee, 

And  never  from  this  palace  of  dim  night 

Depart  again  :  here,  here  will  I  remain 

With  worms  that  are  thy  chambermaids  ;   O,  here 

Will  I  set  up  my  everlasting  rest,  I  I  o 

And  shake  the  yoke  of  inauspicious  stars 

From    this    world-wearied    flesh. — Eyes,   look    your 

last! 
Arms,  take  your  last  embrace  !   and,  lips,  O  you, 

100.   thine]  Q,  thy  F.          102.   shall  I  believe]  Theobald  ;  I  -will  believe, 
Shall  I  believe  Q,  F.          107.  palace}  pallat  Q  (alone). 

103.    Death    is    amorous]    Malone  Thy  drugs  are  quicke.     Thus  with 

compares  Daniel's  Complaint  of  Rosa-  a  kisse  I  die." 

mond (1592),  lines  841-845  :  Qq    4,    5    omit    these    lines;    Daniel 

"  Ah,   how  me  thinkes  I  see   Death  supposes    that    they    are   a   shortened 

dallying  seekes,  version    of  the    speech    intended    for 

To  entertaine  it  selfe  iii  Loves  sweet  the    stage    and    by   accident   printed. 

place.  Where  ere  thou  tut/iblest  in,  he  adds, 

"may  possibly  be  a  corruption  of  a 

And    ugly    Death    sits  faire  within  stage-direction    to    the    actor    to    fall 

her  face."  into  the  tomb."     The  words  may  only 

106.  still]  constantly,    as    often   in  be  a  grim  way  of  saying,  "Wherever 

Shakespeare.  thy  grave  may  be." 

108.   Depart  again]  Following  line  HO.   set  .   .   .   rest]  See  note  on  iv. 

107  and  preceding  line  108  Qq  2,  3  v.  6. 

and  Ff  read:  112-118.   Eyes  .   .   .   bar/;]   Whiter 

"  Depart    againe,   come  lye    thou    in  notes  the  coincidence  that  in  Romeo's 

my  arme,  (armes  Ff)  speech    I.    iv.    106    of    ominous    pre- 

Heer's    to    thy  health,    where    ere  monition,  ideas  drawn  from  the  stars, 

thou  tumblest  in.  the  land,  the  sea  succeed  one  another 

O  true  Appothecarie  !  as  here. 


sc.  in.]         ROMEO    AND   .JULIET  171 

The  doors  of  breath,  seal  with  a  righteous  kiss 
A  dateless  bargain  to  engrossing  death  !  115 

Come,  bitter  conduct,  come,  unsavoury  guide  ! 
Thou  desperate  pilot,  now  at  once  run  on 
The  dashing  rocks  thy  sea-sick  weary  bark  ! 
Here  's  to  my  love  !   [Drinks]   O  true  apothecary  ! 
Thy  drugs  are  quick. — Thus  with  a  kiss  I  die.    120 

[Dies. 

Enter,  at  the  other  end  of  the  churchyard,  Friar 
LAURENCE,  with  a  lantern,  crow,  and  spade. 

Fri.   Saint  Francis  be  my  speed  !   how  oft  to-night 

Have    my  old    feet    stumbled    at  graves  ! — Who 's 
there  ? 

Bal.   Here  's  one,  a  friend,  and  one  that  knows  you  well. 

Fri.   Bliss  be  upon  you  !      Tell  me,  good  my  friend, 

What  torch  is  yond,  that  vainly  lends  his  light   125 
To  grubs  and  eyeless  skulls  ?  as  I  discern, 
It  burneth  in  the  Capels'  monument. 

119.  [Drinks]]  Theobald  (substantially).  120.  Dies]  Theobald.  121. 
Enter  .  .  .]  Malone  (after  Capell)  ;  Enter  Erier  with  Lanthorne,  Crowe,  and 
Spade.  Q,  F. 

114.  doors   of  breath']   Compare    2  Capell  and  Dyce  adopt.     Rolfejustlv 
Henry   IV.    iv.    v.    31:     "gates   of  observes  that  Romeo  has  given  up  the 

breath,''  in  the  sense  of  lips.  helm  to  the   "desperate  pilot,''  wh'i 

115.  dateless.  .  .  engrossing]  Date-  now  is  master  of  the  bark. 

less  is  without  a  term,  everlasting,  as  122.  stumbled]  an  evil  omen,  re- 
in Sonnets,  xxx.  6:  "death's  dateless  ferred  to  in  ,?  Henry  I' I.  IV.  vii.  II. 
night."  "  Engrossing,"  probably  not  Sir  Tobie  Matthew,  stumbling  on  the 
copying  a  document,  but  rather  buy-  morning  of  his  intended  reception  into 
ing  up  wholesale,  as  in  Sonneh,  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  \va> 
cxxxiii.  6.  So  Misselden,  Free  Trad,-,  tempted  to  postpone  it  to  another 
71  (1622):  "Some  one  or  few  .  .  .  day.  After  this  line  (122^  Steevens 
do  joine  together  to  engrosse  and  buy  inserts  from  Q  i,  "'Who  is  it  that 
in  a  Commodotie."  consorts,  so  late,  the  dead?" 

116.  conduct]  See  III.  i.  130.  123.    T'al.]   So,    and   in   subsequent 
118.   thy~\    Pope    read    my,    which  speeches,  Oq  4,  5;   "Man.''O,  E. 


172  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACT  v. 

Bal.   It  doth  so,  holy  sir ;  and  there  's  my  master, 

One  that  you  love. 
Fri.  Who  is  it  ? 

Bal.  Romeo. 

Fri.   How  long  hath  he  been  there  ? 

Bal.  Full  half  an  hour.    130 

Fri.   Go  with  me  to  the  vault. 
Bal.  I  dare  not,  sir  : 

My  master  knows  not  but  I  am  gone  hence ; 

And  fearfully  did  menace  me  with  death 

If  I  did  stay  to  look  on  his  intents. 

Fri.   Stay,    then  ;     I  '11     go     alone. — Fear     comes    upon 
me ;  135 

O,  much  I  fear  some  ill  unlucky  thing. 
Bal.  As  I  did  sleep  under  this  yew-tree  here, 

I  dreamt  my  master  and  another  fought, 

And  that  my  master  slew  him. 
Fri.  Romeo !     [Advances. 

Alack,  alack,  what  blood  is  this  which  stains       140 

The  stony  entrance  of  this  sepulchre  ? 

What  mean  these  masterless  and  gory  swords 

To  lie  discolour'd  by  this  place  of  peace  ? 

[Enters  the  tomb. 

Romeo  !   O,  pale  ! — Who  else  ?  what,  Paris  too  ? 

135.  Stay,   then  ;~\  Ilazlitt,   Slay  then  O,   Stay,  then  F,   Slay  then,  Q  5; 
Fear]  Q,  Fcarcs  F.          136.   unlucky'}  F,  unthriftic  O  (alone).          137.  yew- 
tree}  Pope,  yong  tree.  Q,  young  tree  F.          139.   Romeo  '.}  Rowc  ;  Komeo.  O,  F  ; 
J\o»ieo'{  llanmer.     Advances]    Malone.          143.   Enters  .   .  .]   Capell,   sub- 
stantially. 

136.  unlucky}  Some  editors,  follow-     that  Balthasar,   who  did  not  venture 
ing  Q,  -unthrifty.  to  his  master's   assistance,  wishes   to 

138.   /  dreamt'}    I   fail   to    see    any     break  the  fact  to  the  Friar  rather  than 
other    "touch   of  nature''    here   than     state  it  plainly. 


sc.  in. I          ROMEO    AND   JULIET  173 

And    steep'd    in     blood?  —  Ah,    what    an    unkind 
hour  145 

Is  guilty  of  this  lamentable  chance  !  — 
The  lady  stirs.  {Juliet  -cakes. 

Jit!.  O  comfortable  friar !  where  is  my  lord  ? 
I  do  remember  well  where  I  should  be, 
And  there  I  am:  where  is  my  Romeo?  i  50 

\_Xoise  Ti '/////;/. 

Fri.   I  hear  some  noise. — Lady,  come  from  that  nest 
Of  death,  contagion,  and  unnatural  sleep  : 
A  greater  power  than  we  can  contradict 
Hath  thwarted  our  intents  :   come,  come  away  : 
Thy  husband  in  thy  bosom  there  lies  dead  ;         155 
And  Paris  too :  come,  I  '11  dispose  of  thce 
Among  a  sisterhood  of  holy  nuns. 
Stay  not  to  question,  for  the  watch  is  coming  ; 
Come,  go,  good  Juliet ;  I  dare  no  longer  stay.     [Exit. 

Jul.   Go,  get  thee  hence,  for  I  will  not  away. —  i  60 

What 's  here  ?   a  cup  closed  in  my  true  love's  hand  ? 
Poison,  I  see,  hath  been  his  timeless  end  : — 
O  churl  !   drunk  all,  and  left  no  friendly  drop 
To  help  me  after? — I  will  kiss  thy  lips; 
Haply  some  poison  yet  doth  hang  on  them,         165 

147.  Juliet  wakes]  Pope  (substantially),  Juliet   rises  O  i.  148.   -jL<hc>\-  /.>] 
Q,  where  V  F.          150.    Noise  within]  Capell.          151.   noise.  —  L'idy~\  Capell ; 
noyse  Lady,  O,  F.          159.    Exit   .   .    .]  O,  F:  after  line   160  Dyce.          163. 
0]Q,  F  ;  Ah  O  i ;  «//,]  O,  all?  F  ;  drunk  .  .  .  !,ft]  O  ;  drinkc  .' .  .  .'  //  <  >  3, 
Ff;  drinkc  .   .   .   Icarc.  Q  I. 

148.  co/iifortah!,:]        strengthening,  Dyceand  the  Cambridge  editors  indi- 
supporting  ;    used,    as    often,    in    the  cale  by  bringing '' Exit ;>  to  line  160, 
active  sense.      So  All 's  \\r>-!!,  I.  i.  86,  may  he  addressed  to  the   Friar:   hut 
"  Be  comfortable  to  my  mother.''  they  may  also  he  uttered  by  Juliet  to 

158.   thc-i<aic!i\  Shakespeare  follows     herself  after  his  departure. 
Brooke's  poem.  162.   tint, '.' .<v]      untimely,      as      in 

160.    Go  .   .   .   a'd>ay\  The  words,  as     Richard  II,  tv.  i.  5. 


174  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACT  v. 

To  make  me  die  with  a  restorative.        [Kisses  him. 
Thy  lips  are  warm  ! 

First  Watch.  [  Within.~\        Lead,  boy  :  which  way  ? 
Jul.  Yea,  noise  ?  then  I  '11  be  brief. — O  happy  dagger  ! 

[Snatching  Romeo's  dagger. 

This  is  thy  sheath  ;  [Stabs  herself. 

there  rust,  and  let  me  die. 
[Falls  on  Romeo's  body,  and  dies. 

Enter  Watch,  with  the  Page  of  PARIS. 

Page.  This    is   the  place ;   there,  where   the   torch  doth 

burn.  170 

First  Watch.  The  ground   is  bloody  ;  search   about  the 

churchyard  : 
Go,  some  of  you,  whoe'er  you  find,  attach. — 

[Exeunt  some. 

Pitiful  sight !   here  lies  the  county  slain, 
And  Juliet  bleeding,  warm,  and  newly  dead, 
Who  here  hath  lain  this  two  days  buried. —        175 
Go,  tell  the  prince ;  run  to  the  Capulets ; 

167.  First  Watch  [Within]]  Capell ;  Enter  boy  and  Watch.  Watch  Q,  F. 
168.  Snatching  .  .  .]  Steevens.  169.  This  is\  Q,  '  Tis  in  F.  Stabs 
herself]  Kils  herselfe  Y  (at  end  of  line),  omitted  Q,  She  stabs  herselfe  and 
falles  Q  i  ;  rust]  Q,  F  ;  rest  Q  I.  Falls  .  .  .]  Malone.  Enter  Watch  .  .  .] 
Capell  substantially,  here,  in  place  assigned  by  Q  I  (compare  collation, 
line  167).  170.  Page]  Capell,  Watch  boy  Q,  Boy  F.  172.  Exeunt  .  .  .] 
Hanmer  substantially.  175.  this]  Q  these  F. 

169.   rnst~\  Of  course  restQ  I,  which  otherwise  rust   in   its  sheath,   rusting 

many  editors   prefer,    may   be   right ;  in   her    heart  ;    and,    with  fierce    and 

but  our  best  authority  is  Q,  and  rust  amorous  joy,  she  cries,   '  This  is  thy 

would  more  readily  be  misprinted  rest  sheath  ;  there  rust,  and  let  me  die.'  " 

than  vice  versa.     Grant  White,   who  'Tis  in  of  F  is  an  attempt  to  emend 

had  regarded  rust  as  a  misprint,  altered  the  misprint  '77s  is  of  Q  3.     Mr.  Fleay 

his    opinion,    and    wrote:     "Juliet's  proposes  dagger  lie  In  this,    ending 

imagination   is  excited,   and,   looking  line  167  at  noise. 
beyond  her  suicidal  act,  she  sees  her          175.   two  days']  See  iv.  i.  105. 
dead   Romeo  s  dagger,    which    would 


sc.  in.]         HOMEO   AND   JULIET  175 

Raise  up  the  Montagues ;  some  others  search  : — 

{Exeunt  other  Watchmen. 

We  see  the  ground  whereon  these  woes  do  lie  ; 
Hut  the  true  ground  of  all  these  piteous  woes 
We  cannot  without  circumstance  descry.  i  80 

Re-enter  some  of  the  Watch,  witli  HALTHASAR. 

Second  Watch.   Here 's  Romeo's  man  ;   we  found   him   in 

the  churchyard. 
First  Watch.   Hold   him   in   safety  till   the  prince    come 

hither. 

Re-enter  Friar  LAURENCE,  and  another  Watchman. 

Third  Watch.   Here  is  a  friar,  that  trembles,  sighs  and 

weeps  : 

We  took  this  mattock  and  this  spade  from  him, 
As  he  was  coming  from  this  churchyard  side.      185 

First  Watch.   A  great  suspicion  :  stay  the  friar  too. 

Enter  the  PRINCE  and  Attendants. 

Prince.   What  misadventure  is  so  early  up, 

That  calls  our  person  from  our  morning's  rest  ? 

Enter  CAPULET,  Lady  CAPULET,  and  others. 
Cap.   What  should  it  be  that  they  so  shriek  abroad  ? 

177.  Exeunt  .  .  .]  Capell.  180.  Re-enter  .  .  .]  Dyce  ;  Enter  Rnmeos 
man  O,  E.  iSi.  Second  Watch]  Rowe ;  Watch  o,  E.  182,  iS6.  Eirst 
Watch]  Rowe,  Chiefe  Watch  O,  O>n.  E.  185.  churchyard}  V .  church- 

yards   O.          1 86.   too}  E,    too    too    O.  iSS.    i/toniiiijs]   E,   »/.•»•///;/„-   U. 

Enter  .    .    .]  Capell  (substantially),    Enter  Capel>  (J,  Enter  Capulet  and  hi.-. 
Wife  P".          189.   they  so  shriek]  E,  is  so  s/irikt:  (.). 


176  ROMEO    AND   JULIET          [ACT  v. 

Lady  Cap.  The  people  in  the  street  cry  "  Romeo,"      1 90 
Some  "  Juliet,"  and  some  "  Paris  "  ;  and  all  run 
With  open  outcry  toward  our  monument. 

Prince.  What  fear  is  this  which  startles  in  our  ears  ? 

First  Watch.  Sovereign,  here  lies  the  County  Paris  slain  ; 
And  Romeo  dead  ;  and  Juliet,  dead  before,  195 
Warm  and  new  kill'd. 

Prince.   Search,  seek,  and    know  how  this    foul    murder 
comes. 

First  Watch.   Here  is  a  friar,  and  slaughtered    Romeo's 

man, 

With  instruments  upon  them  fit  to  open 
These  dead  men's  tombs.  200 

Cap.  O  heaven  ! — O  wife,  look  how  our  daughter  bleeds  ! 
This  dagger  hath  mista'en,  for,  lo,  his  house 
Is  empty  on  the  back  of  Montague, 
And  it  mis-sheathed  in  my  daughter's  bosom  ! 

Lady  Cap.  O  me  !  this  sight  of  death  is  as  a  bell  205 
That  warns  my  old  age  to  a  sepulchre. 

Enter  MONTAGUE  and  others. 
Prince.   Come,  Montague ;  for  thou  art  early  up, 

190.  The  people']  Pope  ;  O  the  people  Q,  F.  193.  our']  Capell(  Johnson  and 
Heath  conjee.)  ;  yotirQ,  F.  194,  198.  First  Watch]  Capell  ;  Watch  Q,  F. 
201.  hcaven~\  F,  heavens  Q  (alone).  204.  //]  Q  (alone),  is  F.  Enter  .  .  .] 
Capell  ;  Enter  Mountague  Q,  F. 

gestion  of  the  Cambridge  editors,  "that  on  the  back  below  the  waist.  See  for 

is  so  shriek'd  abroad?"  evidence  Steevens's  note. 

190.  The  people]  Several  editors  204.  And  if}  The  force  of  lo,  line 

retain  OofO,  F.  202,  goes  on  from  "  his  house  "  (the 

200.  tombs]  Here  Q,  which  had  sheath)  to  it,  the  dagger.  With  the 

"  Enter  Capels"  line  188,  has  "Enter  reading  And  is  F,  from  for  lo  to 

Capulet  and  his  Wife."  Montague  must  be  regarded  as  paren- 

203.  bac/s]  The  dagger  was  carried  thetic.  Mommsen  conjectures  "  And 

it  is  mis-sheath'd." 


sc.  in.]         ROMEO    AND   JITLIET  177 

To  see  thy  son  and  heir  more  early  down. 
i\fon.   Alas  !    my  liege,  my  wife  is  dead  to-night ; 

Grief     of      my     son's      exile      hath      stopp'd     her 
breath :  210 

What  further  woe  conspires  against  mine  age  ? 
Prince.   Look,  and  thou  shalt  see. 
Lion.   O  thou  untaught !   what  manners  is  in  this, 

To  press  before  thy  father  to  a  grave  ? 
Prince.   Seal  up  the  mouth  of  outrage  for  a  while,       2  I  5 

Till  we  can  clear  these  ambiguities, 

And    know    their     spring,    their    head,    their    true 
descent ; 

And  then  will  I  be  general  of  your  woes, 

And  lead  you  even  to  death  :   meantime  forbear, 

And  let  mischance  be  slave  to  patience. —  220 

Bring  forth  the  parties  of  suspicion. 
Fri.   I  am  the  greatest,  able  to  do  least, 

Yet  most  suspected,  as  the  time  and  place 

Doth  make  against  me,  of  this  direful  murder  ; 

And  here  I  stand,  both  to  impeach  and  purge    225 

Myself  condemned  and  myself  excused. 
Prince.   Then    say   at    once    what    thou    dost    know    in 
this. 


2io.  breath]  After  this    line    Uyce  equivalent   to    a   :,\ liable,    is   perhaps 

(following   Ritson)    inclines   to   think  intended  alter  S.iw/c. 

the  following  line  from  Q  I  should  be  213.   manners]  Shakespeare  makes 

added:     "And    young    Benvolio    is  the    word,    at    pleasure,    singular    or 

deceased  too."  plural. 

212.   Look]    Stccvens      conjectures  215.   outrage]  passionate  utterance, 

"  Look  in  this  monument,  and,"  etc.  as    in    1    Henry     I'l.      \\ .     i.     126: 

"Look    here,"   and     "Look    there"  "  this  immodest,  clamorous  outrage." 

have     been      proposed.       A     pause,  Collier  (MS.),  outcry. 

I  2 


178  ROMEO    AND   JULIET          [ACT  v. 

Fri.   I  will  be  brief,  for  my  short  date  of  breath 
Is  not  so  long  as  is  a  tedious  tale. 
Romeo,  there  dead,  was  husband  to  that  Juliet ;   230 
And  she,  there  dead,  that  Romeo's  faithful  wife  : 
I  married  £hem ;  and  their  stol'n  marriage-day 
Was  Tybalt's  doomsday,  whose  untimely  death 
Banish'd  the  new-made  bridegroom  from  this  city  ; 
For  whom,  and  not  for  Tybalt,  Juliet  pined.        235 
You,  to  remove  that  siege  of  grief  from  her, 
Betroth'd,  and  would  have  married  her  perforce, 
To  County  Paris :  then  comes  she  to  me, 
And  with  wild  looks  bid  me  devise  some  mean 
To  rid  her  from  this  second  marriage,  240 

Or  in  my  cell  there  would  she  kill  herself. 
Then  gave  I  her,  so  tutor'd  by  my  art, 
A  sleeping  potion  ;  which  so  took  effect 
As  I  intended,  for  it  wrought  on  her 
The  form  of  death  :   meantime  I  writ  to  Romeo    245 
That  he  should  hither  come  as  this  dire  night, 
To  help  to  take  her  from  her  borrow'd  grave, 
Being  the  time  the  potion's  force  should  cease. 
But  he  which  bore  my  letter,  Friar  John, 
Was  stay'd  by  accident,  and  yesternight  250 

231.   that'}  Qq  4,  5  ;  (hats  Q,  that's  F.         239.  mean]  Q,  means  F. 

228.  brief]  M alone  :  "Shakespeare  -£//,;''.  Diet.}.  I  have  noticed  it  fre- 

was  led  into  this  uninteresting  nar-  quently  in  Richardson's  novels,  used 

rative  by  following  Rotneus  and  Juliet  as  in  the  following  from  Mrs.  Delany's 

too  closely."  Ulrici  argues  that  it  is  Anlobio£.  iii.  608  (quoted  in  New 

needed  for  the  reconciliation  of  the  Eiig.  Diet.):  "To  carry  us  off  to 

houses,  which  follows.  Longlcat  as  next  Thursday."  Its 

246.  as]  This  as  used  with  adverbs  force  was  restrictive  ;  now  we  regard 

and  adverbial  phrases  of  time  is  still  it  as  redundant.  Compare  Measure 

common  dialectically,  but  literary  for  Measure,  v.  i.  74:  "  As  then  the 

English  retains  only  as  yet  (A'cw  messenger." 


sc.m.1         ROMEO   AND   JULIET  179 

Return'd  my  letter  back.      Then,  all  alone, 

At  the  prefixed  hour  of  her  waking, 

Came  I  to  take  her  from  her  kindred's  vault, 

Meaning  to  keep  her  closely  at  my  cell 

Till  I  conveniently  could  send  to  Romeo:  255 

But  when  I  came,  some  minute  ere  the  time 

Of  her  awakening,  here  untimely  lay 

The  noble  Paris  and  true  Romeo  dead. 

She  \vakes ;   and  I  entreated  her  come  forth 

And  bear  this  work  of  heaven  with  patience  :      260 

But  then  a  noise  did  scare  me  from  the  tomb, 

And  she,  too  desperate,  would  not  go  with  me, 

But,  as  it  seems,  did  violence  on  herself. 

All  this  I  know  ;   and  to  the  marriage 

Her  nurse  is  privy:  and,  if  aught  in  this  265 

Miscarried  by  my  fault,  let  my  old  life 

Be  sacrificed  some  hour  before  his  time 

Unto  the  rigour  of  severest  law. 

Prince.  We  still  have  known  thee  for  a  holy  man. — 

Where 's    Romeo's    man  ?     what     can    he    say    to 
this?  270 

Bal.   I  brought  my  master  news  of  Juliet's  death; 
And  then  in  post  he  came  from  Mantua 
To  this  same  place,  to  this  same  monument. 
This  letter  he  early  bid  me  give  his  father, 


256.  minute}  Hanmer  minutes',  272.  in  post}  in  haste,  or  post- 
compare  liour  in  line  267.  haste,  as  often  in  Shakespeare. 

264.  All  fills'}  Daniel  conjectures  274.  he  early}  Marshall  conjectures 

"This,  all  I  know";  "hid  me  give  his  father  early,"  or 

269.   still}  constantly,  always.  "  bid  me  early  give  his  father." 


180  ROMEO   AND   JULIET          [ACTV. 

And     threaten'd     me    with     death,    going     in    the 
vault,  275 

If  I  departed  not  and  left  him  there. 
Prince.  Give  me  the  letter ;   I  will  look  on  it. — 

Where     is    the     county's     page     that     raised     the 

watch  ? — 

Sirrah,  what  made  your  master  in  this  place  ? 
Page.   He     came     with     flowers     to     strew     his     lady's 
grave ;  280 

And  bid  me  stand  aloof,  and  so  I  did  : 
Anon  comes  one  with  light  to  ope  the  tomb ; 
And  by  and  by  my  master  drew  on  him  ; 
And  then  I  ran  away  to  call  the  watch. 
Prince.   This  letter  doth  make  good  the  friar's  words,    285 
Their  course  of  love,  the  tidings  of  her  death  : 
And  here  he  writes  that  he  did  buy  a  poison 
Of  a  poor  pothecary,  and  therewithal 
Came  to  this  vault  to  die,  and  lie  with  Juliet.— 
Where     be     these     enemies  ?  —  Capulet !  —  Mon- 
tague !  290 
See  what  a  scourge  is  laid  upon  your  hate, 
That  heaven    finds    means    to    kill  your  joys  with 

love  ; 

And  I,  for  winking  at  your  discords  too, 
Have  lost  a  brace  of  kinsmen :  all  are  punish'd. 
Cap.  O  brother  Montague,  give  me  thy  hand:  295 

280.    Page]  F,  Boy  Q. 

279.  madc~\  was  doing,  or  was  294.  brace}  Mercutio  and  Paris, 

about,  as  in  Alcrry  Wives,  II.  i.  244:  See  in.  i.  115,  in.  v.  180  (li  frincffy 

"What  they  made  there  I  know  parentage"  Q  i),  and  v.  iii.  75.  In 

not."  Trail  us  and  Cress  ida,  iv.  v.  175 

283.  by  and  by}  immediately,  pre-  brace  is  used  as  here:  "Your  brace 

sently,  as  often  in  Shakespeare.  of  warlike  brothers." 


sc.  in.]          ROMEO    AND   JULIET 

This  is  my  daughter's  jointure,  for  no  more 

Can  I  demand. 
Mon.  But  I  can  give  thee  more : 

For  I  will  raise  her  statue  in  pure  gold  ; 

That  whiles  Verona  by  that  name  is  known, 

There  shall  no  figure  at  such  rate  be  set  300 

As  that  of  true  and  faithful  Juliet. 
Cap.   As  rich  shall  Romeo  by  his  lady  lie  ; 

Poor  sacrifices  of  our  enmity  ! 

Prince,  A  glooming  peace  this  morning  with  it  brings  ; 
The  sun,  for  sorrow,  will  not  show  his  head  :    305 

Go  hence,  to  have  more  talk  of  these  sad  things  ; 
Some  shall  be  pardon'd,  and  some  punished  : 

For  never  was  a  story  of  more  woe 

Than  this  of  Juliet  and  her  Romeo.  \_E.veunt. 


301.  true]  Collier  (.MS. )/ai>:  307.  pardon' d  .    ,   .  fmiL/u'd]      In 

302.  Ro?nco\  Several  editors  follow  Brooke's  poem  the  Nurse  is  banished, 
O    Romeo's    and    lady  s.       Theobald  because   she    had    hid   the   marriage  ; 
has  J\o>/ieo's  and  lady.  Romeo's  servant    is   allowed   to   live 

304.  glooming]  The  word  is  neither  free  ;  the  apothecary  is  handed  ;   Knur 

uncommon  nor  obsolete,  but  it  dropped  Lawrence  is  discharged,   retires  to  a 

for  a  timeout  of  literature  ;  hence  prob-  hermitage    two    miles    from    Verona, 

ably  F  4  gloomy.  and,  after  five  years,   there  dies. 


APPENDIX    I 

SOMK  PASSAC.KS  FROM  THK  QUARTO  OF  1597 

THK  passages  here  selected  differ  considerably  from 
the  text  of  1599.  The  following  is  the  scene  in  O  i 
corresponding  to  II.  vi. : 

Enter  Ro.MEO,  Frier. 

Rojn.  Now  Father  Laurence,  in  thy  holy  grant 

Consists  the  good  of  me  and  luliet. 
Fr.  Without  more  words  I  will  doo  all  I  may, 

To  make  you  happie  if  in  me  it  lye. 
Rom.  This  morning  here  she  pointed  we  should  meet, 

And  consumate  those  never  parting  bands, 

Witnes  of  our  harts  love  by  ioyning  hands, 

And  come  she  will. 
Fr.  I  gesse  she  will  indeed, 

Youths  love  is  quicke,  swifter  than  swiftest  speed. 

Enter  IUI.IET  somewhat  fast,  and  embracctJi  Romeo. 

See  where  she  comes. 

So  light  of  foote  nere  hurts  the  troden  flower  : 

Of  love  and  ioy,  see  see  the  soveraignc  power. 
////.  Romeo. 
Rom.  My  luliet  welcome.     As  doo  waking  eyes 

(Cloasd  in  Nights  mysts)  attend  the  frolicke  Da}-, 

So  Romeo  hath  expected  luliet, 

And  thou  art  come. 
lul.  I  am  (if  I  be  Day) 

Come  to  my  Sunne  :  shine  foorth,  and  make  me  faire. 
Rom.  All  beauteous  fairnes  dwelleth  in  thine  eyes. 
////.  Romeo  from  thine  all  brightnes  doth  arise. 
Fr.  Come  wantons,  come,  the  stealing  houres  do  passe 


184  APPENDIX    I 

Defer  imbracements  till  some  fitter  time, 

Part  for  a  while,  you  shall  not  be  alone, 

Till  holy  Church  have  ioynd  ye  both  in  one. 
Rom.  Lead  holy  Father,  all  delay  seemes  long. 
lul.  Make  hast,  make  hast,  this  lingring  doth  us  wrong. 
Fr.  O,  soft  and  faire  makes  sweetest  worke  they  say. 

Hast  is  a  common  hindrer  in  crosse  way. 

\_Exeunt  omnes. 

The  following  corresponds  in  Q  I  to  III.  i.  94-114  : 

Mer.  Is  he  gone,  hath  hee  nothing?  A  poxe  on  your 
houses. 

Rom.  What  art  thou  hurt  man,  the  wound  is  not  deepe. 

Mer.  Noe  not  so  deepe  as  a  Well,  nor  so  wide  as  a  barne 
doore,  but  it  will  serve  I  warrant.  \Vhat  meant  you 
to  come  betweene  us  ?  I  was  hurt  under  your  arme. 

Rom.  I  did  all  for  the  best. 

Mer.  A  poxe  of  your  houses,  I  am  fairely  drest.  Sirra 
goe  fetch  me  a  Surgeon. 

Boy.  I  goe  my  Lord. 

Mer.  I  am  pepperd  for  this  world,  I  am  sped  yfaith,  he 
hath  made  wormes  meate  of  me,  and  ye  aske  for  me 
to  morrow  you  shall  finde  me  a  grave  man.  A  poxe 
of  your  houses,  I  shall  be  fairely  mounted  upon  four 
mcns  shoulders :  For  your  house  of  the  Mountegues 
and  the  Capolets :  and  then  some  peasantly  rogue, 
some  Sexton,  some  base  slave  shall  write  my  Epitaph, 
that  Tybalt  came  and  broke  the  Princes  Lawes,  and 
Mercutio  was  slaine  for  the  first  and  second  cause. 
Wher  's  the  Surgeon  ? 

Boy.  Hee  's  come  sir. 

Mer.  Now  heele  keepe  a  mumbling  in  my  guts  on  the 
other  side,  come  Benvolio,  lend  me  thy  hand  :  a  poxe 
of  your  houses.  {Exeunt. 

The  following  corresponds  in  O  i  to  IV.  i.  77  to  end  of 
scene : 

Jul.  Oh  bid  me  leape  (rather  than  marrie  Paris 
From  off  the  battlements  of  yonder  tower : 


APPENDIX    I  185 

Or  chaine  me  to  some  stecpic  mountaities  top, 

Where  roaring  Beares  and  savage  Lions  are : 

Or  shut  me  nightly  in  a  Charnell-house, 

With  reekie  shankes,  and  yeolow  chaples  sculls  : 

Or  lay  me  in  tombc  with  one  new  dead  : 

Things  that  to   hcare   them    namde  have   made   me 

tremble  ; 

And  I  will  cloo  it  without  feare  or  doubt, 
To  keep  my  selfe  a  faithfull  unstaind  Wife 
To  my  deere  Lord,  my  decrest  Romeo . 

Fr.   Hold  Juliet,  hie  thee  home,  get  thee  to  bed, 

Let  not  thy  Nurse  lye  with  thee  in  thy  Chamber : 
And  when  thou  art  alone,  take  thou  this  Violl, 
And  this  distilled  Liquor  drinke  thou  off: 
When  presently  through  all  thy  veynes  shall  run 
A  dull  and  heavie  slumber,  which  shall  sea/.e 
Kach  vitall  spirit:  for  no  Pulse  shall  keepe 
His  naturall  progresse,  but  surcease  to  beate  : 
No  signe  of  breath  shall  testifie  thou  livst. 
And  in  this  borrowed  likenes  of  shrunke  death, 
Thou  shalt  remaine  full  two  and  fortie  houres. 
And  when  thou  art  laid  in  thy  Kindreds  Vault, 
He  send  in  haste  to  Mantua  to  thy  Lord, 
And  he  shall  come  and  take  thee  from  thy  grave. 

I uL  Frier  I  goe,  be  sure  thou  send  for  my  deare  Romeo. 

{Exeunt. 

The  following  in  O  I  corresponds  to  iv.  v.  41-95  : 

Par.  Have  I  thought  long  to  see  this  mornings  face, 

And  doth  it  now  present  such  prodegies? 

Accurst,  unhappy,  miserable  man, 

Forlorne,  forsaken,  destitute  I  am: 

Borne  to  the  world  to  be  a  slave  in  it. 

Distrest,  remediles,  and  unfortunate. 

O  heavens,  O  nature,  wherefore  did  you  make  me, 

To  live  so  vile,  so  wretched  as  I  shall. 
Cap.  O  heere  she  lies  that  was  our  hope,  our  joy, 

And  being  dead,  dead  sorrow  nips  us  all. 

\All  at  once  cry  out  and  luring  their  /lands, 


186  APPENDIX    I 

All  cry.  And  all  our  ioy,  and  all  our  hope  is  dead, 

Dead,  lost,  undone,  absented,  wholy  fled. 
Cap.  Cruel,  uniust,  impartiall  destinies, 

Why  to  this  day  have  you  preserv'd  my  life? 

To  see  my  hope,  my  stay,  my  ioy,  my  life, 

Deprivde  of  sence,  of  life,  of  all  by  death, 

Cruell,  uniust,  impartiall  destinies. 
Cap.  O  sad  fac'd  sorrow  map  of  misery, 

Why  this  sad  time  have  I  desird  to  see. 

This  day,  this  uniust,  this  impartiall  day 

Wherein  I  hop'd  to  see  my  comfort  full, 

To  be  deprivde  by  suddaine  destinie. 
Moth.  O  woe,  alacke,  distrest,  why  should  I  live  ? 

To  see  this  day,  this  miserable  day. 

Alacke  the  time  that  ever  I  was  borne, 

To  be  partaker  of  this  destinie. 

Alacke  the  day,  alacke  and  welladay. 
Fr.  O  peace  for  shame,  if  not  for  charity. 

Your  daughter  lives  in  peace  and  happines, 

And  it  is  vaine  to  wish  it  otherwise. 

Come  sticke  your  Rosemary  in  this  dead  coarse, 

And  as  the  custome  of  our  Country  is, 

In  all  her  best  and  sumptuous  ornaments, 

Convay  her  where  her  Ancestors  lie  tomb'd. 
Cap.  Let  it  be  so  come  wofull  sorrow  mates, 

Let  us  together  taste  this  bitter  fate. 

[  They  all  but  the  Nurse  goefoortk,  casting  Rose- 
mary on  her  and  shutting  the  Curtcns. 

The  following  in  O  i  corresponds  to  V.  iii.  1-17 : 

Enter  COUXTIE  PARIS  and  Ids  Page  with  flowers  and 

siveete  water. 

Par.  Put  out  the  torch,  and  lye  thee  all  along 

Under  this  Ew-tree,  keeping  thine  eare  close  to  the 

hollow  ground. 

And  if  thou  heare  one  tread  within  this  Churchyard 
Staight  give  me  notice. 
Boy.  I  will  my  Lord. 

[Paris  strewes  the  Tomb  ivith  flo ivers. 


APPENDIX    I  187 

Par.  Swecte  Flower,  with  flowers  I  strew  thy  Bridalc  bed  : 
Sweete  Tombe  that  in  thy  circuite  dost  containe, 
The  perfect  modell  of  eternitie: 
Faire  Juliet  that  with  Angells  dost  remaine, 
Accept  this  latest  favour  at  my  hands, 
That  living  honourd  thee,  and  being  dead 
With  funerall  praises  doo  adorne  thy  Tombe. 

Boy  ivJii sties  and  calls.   My  Lord. 


APPENDIX  II 

ANALYSIS  OF  BROOKE'S  "THE  TRAGICALL  HISTORYE 
OF  ROMEUS  AND  lULIET,"  WITH  QUOTATIONS 

VERONA  described  1-12. 

The  houses  of  Capelet  and  Montagew ;  their  strifes  ; 
to  allay  which  Prince  Escalus  uses  first  gentle  means,  and 
then  sterner.  (25-50.) 

Romeus,  a  beautiful  youth,  loves  a  fair  maid,  but  she, 
being  wise  and  virtuous,  repels  him.  (51-72.) 

After  many  months  of  hopeless  love,  he  desires  to 
cure  himself  by  travel ;  yet  cannot  resolve  upon  it : 

He  languisheth  and  melts  avvaye,  as  snow  against  the 

sonne. 
His  kyndred  and  alyes   do  wonder  what  he  ayles. 

(73-100.) 

The  trustiest  of  his  friends  rebukes  him,  and  advises 
him  to  love  a  kinder  mistress  : 

Some  one  of  bewty,  favour,  shape,  and  of  so  lovely 

porte  : 

With  so  fast  fixed  eye,  perhaps  thou  mayst  beholde : 
That  thou  shalt  quite  forget  thy  love,  and  passions 

pastofolde.     (101-140.) 

Romeus  promises  to  attend  feasts  and  banquets,  and 
to  view  other  beauties.  (141-150.) 

Before  three  months  pass,  Christmas  games  begin,  and 
Capel  gives  a  banquet : 

No  Lady,  no  knight  in  Verona 

But  Capilet  himselfe  hath  byd  unto  his  feast : 
Or  by  his  name  in  paper  sent,  appoynted  as  a  geast. 
(151-164.) 

188 


APPENDIX    II  189 

Romcus  goes  masked  with  other  five;  when  they  un- 
mask, he  retires  to  a  nook,  but  is  recognised  by  the  torches' 
light.  (165-182.) 

The  Capilets  restrain  their  ire.     (183-190.) 

Me  views  the  ladies;  sees  one  more  beautiful  than  the 
rest  ;  and  quite  forgets  his  former  love.  Juliet's  eyes 
anchor  on  him.  Love  shoots  her  with  his  bow.  Their 
eyes  inform  them  of  mutual  love.  (191-244.) 

After  a  dance,  Juliet  finds  Romeus  seated  by  her  : 

And  on  the  other  side  there  sat  one  cald  Mercutio, 
A  courtier  that  eche  where  was  highly  had  in  pryce : 
For  he  was  coorteous  of  his  speche,  and  pleasant  of 

devise. 

Even  as  a  Lyon  would  emong  the  lambes  be  bolde : 
Such  was  emong  the  bashful!  maydes,   Mercutio  to 

beholdc. 
With  frendly  gripe   he  ccasd    fayrc   Juliets  snowish 

hand : 
A  gyft  he  had  that  nature  gave  him  in  his  swathing 

band. 

That  froscn  mountayne  yse  was  never  halfe  so  cold 
As  were  his  handes. 

The  lovers'  hands  meet,  palm  to  palm.  Romeus  cannot 
speak  ;  Juliet  calls  the  time  of  his  arrival  blessed,  and  then 
is  silent  with  love ;  presently  they  are  able  to  discourse, 
and  Romeus  declares  his  passion.  (245-308.) 

Juliet,  before  leaving  Romeus,  confesses  that  (her 
honour  saved)  she  is  his.  (309-318.) 

Romeus  learns  her  name  ;  blames  Fortune  and  Love  ; 
but  he  now  serves  one  who  is  not  cruel.  (319-340.) 

Juliet,  inquiring  first  concerning  others,  learns  from 
her  old  Nurse  her  lover's  name : 

And  tell  me  who  is  he  with  vysor  in  his  hand 

That    yender   doth    in     masking    weede   besyde    the 

window  stand. 
His  name  is  Romeus  (said  she)  a  Montegewe. 

Juliet  inwardly  despairs,  but  keeps  up  an  outward 
show  of  gladness.  She  cannot  sleep,  and  questions  with 


190  APPENDIX    II 

herself,  May  not  Romeus  be  false?  But  treason  cannot 
lurk  in  a  shape  so  perfect.  She  will  love  him,  if  he  mind 
to  make  her  his  lawful  wedded  wife,  for  the  alliance  may 
procure  the  houses'  peace.  (341-428.) 

Morning  comes  ;  Romeus  passes,  and  sees  Juliet  at 
her  window;  but  is  wary  of  danger.  This  happens  often. 
He  discovers  a  garden-plot  fronting  full  upon  her  leaning 
place.  Thither,  when  night  has  spread  her  black  mantle, 
he  goes  armed  ;  but  for  a  week  or  two  in  vain.  One 
moonlight  night  Juliet  leans  within  her  window,  and 
espies  him.  She  rejoices  even  more  than  he,  for  she  could 
not  account  for  his  absence  by  day.  She  is  alarmed  for 
his  safety  : 

Oh  Romeus  (of  your  lyfe)  too  lavas  sure  you  are  : 
That  in  this  place,  and  at  thys  tyme  to  hasard  it  you 

dare. 
What  if  your  dedly  foes  my  kynsmen  saw  you  here  ? 

He  answers  that  he  can  defend  himself,  and  loves  life 
only  for  her  sake.  Weeping,  her  head  leaning  on  her  arm, 
she  tells  her  love,  and  promises  that,  if  wedlock  be  his 
end  and  mark,  she  will  follow  him  wherever  he  may  go  ; 
but  if  he  intends  her  dishonour,  let  him  cease  his  suit. 
Romeus  rejoices,  and  says  he  will  seek  advice  early 
tomorrow  from  Friar  Lawrence.  (429—564.) 
The  Friar  is  described  : 

The  barefoote  fryer  gyrt  with  cord  his  grayish  weede, 
For  he  of  Frauncis  order  was,  a  fryer  as  I  reede. 

The  secretes  eke  he    knew  in   natures  woorkes  that 
loorke. 

Romeus,  not  staying  till  the  morrow,  goes  to  him. 
He  advises  delay,  but,  hoping  to  reconcile  the  houses 
by  the  marriage,  is  overcome.  Romeus  consents  to  the 
delay  of  a  day  and  a  night.  (565-616.) 

Juliet's  confidante  is  the  ancient  Nurse,  who  lies  in  her 
chamber,  and  whose  aid  she  secures  by  promised  hire. 
The  Nurse  eoes  to  Romeus  : 


APPENDIX    II  i  in 

On  Satcrclay,  quod  he,  if  Juliet  come  to  shrift, 
She  shal be  shrived  and  mariecl. 

She  promises  to  devise  an  excuse  for  going,  and  talks  of 
her  babe  Juliet : 

And  how  she  gave  her  suckc  in  youth,  she  leavcth 

not  to  tell. 

A  prety  babe  (quod  she)  it  was  when  it  was  yong  : 
Lord  how  it  could  full  pretely  have  prated  with  it 

tong. 

Romcus  gives  her  gold  ;  she  returns,  full  of  his  praises  : 

But  of  our  marriage  say  at  once,  what  aunswer  have 

you  brought? 

Nay  soft,  quoth  she,  I  feare,  your  hurt  by  sodain  ioye  : 
I   list  not    play  quoth    Juliet,  although    thou  list  to 

toye.     (617-714.) 

On  Saturday  Juliet,  the  Nurse,  and  a  maid,  sent  by 
Juliet's  mother,  go  to  the  church.  The  Friar  dismisses 
the  Nurse  and  maid  to  hear  "  a  mass  or  two."  Romeus 
has  already  waited  two  hours  in  the  Friar's  cell :  "  Echc 
minute  seemde  an  howre,  and  every  howre  a  day."  The 
lovers  are  married.  Romeus  bids  Juliet  send  the  Nurse 
to  him  for  a  ladder  of  cord.  They  think  the  day  long;  if 
they  might  have  the  sun  bound  to  their  will  "  Black  shade 
of  night  and  doubled  darke  should  straight  all  over 
hyde."  (715-826.) 

The  hour  arrives ;  Romeus  leaps  the  wall  ;  climbs 
the  ladder.  Bride  and  bridegroom  embrace,  and  talk  of 
their  past  and  present  state.  The  Nurse  urges  them  to 
consummate  their  union.  (827-918.) 

Dawn  comes :  "  The  hastines  of  Phoebus  steeds  in 
great  despyte  they  blame."  Their  bliss  lasts  a  month  or 
twain.  On  Easter  Monday  Tibalt,  a  young  Capilet, 
Juliet's  uncle's  son,  "best  exercisd  in  feates  of  armes," 
leads  a  street-fight  against  the  Montagewes.  Romeus  seeks 
to  part  the  combatants :  "  Not  dread,  but  other  waighty 
cause  my  hasty  hand  doth  stay."  Tybalt  addresses  him 
as  "coward,  traytor  boy";  they  fight;  Tybalt  is  slain. 


192  APPENDIX    II 

The  Capilets  demand  Romeus'  death  ;  the  Montagewes 
remonstrate;  the  lookers-on  blame  Tybalt;  the  Prince 
pronounces  exile  as  his  sentence,  and  bids  the  households 
lay  aside  their  bloody  weapons.  (919-1074.) 

Juliet  weeps  and  tears  her  hair  ;  wails  Tybalt's  death  ; 
curses  her  fatal  window ;  rails  against  Romeus ;  and 
charges  herself  with  murder  for  touching  the  honour  of  his 
name.  The  Nurse  finds  her  seemingly  dead  upon  her 
bed ;  she  revives  ;  breaks  into  lamentation  ;  is  cheered  by 
the  Nurse  with  the  hope  of  Romeus'  recall  from  exile. 
The  Nurse  offers  to  go  to  Romeus,  who  lurks  in  the  Friar's 
cell.  Her  mistress  sends  her  forth.  (1075-1256.) 

Romeus  does  not  yet  know  his  doom.  The  Friar 
goes  forth,  learns  the  sentence,  and  returns.  He  tells  the 
Nurse  that  Romeus  shall  come  at  night  to  Juliet  to  devise 
of  their  affairs.  He  informs  Romeus  that  the  sentence  is 
good,  not  death  but  banishment.  Romeus  is  frantic,  tears 
his  hair,  throws  himself  on  the  ground,  and  prays  for 
death  ;  he  blames  nature,  his  time  and  place  of  birth,  the 
stars,  and  Fortune.  The  Friar  rebukes  him  : 

Art  thou  quoth  he  a  man  ?  thy  shape  saith,  so  thou 

art: 
Thy  crying  and  thy  weping  eyes  denote  a  womans 

hart. 

So  that  I  stoocle  in  doute  this  howre  (at  the  least) 
If  thou  a  man  or  woman  wert,  or  els  a  brutish  beast. 

He  exhorts  Romeus  to  fortitude  ;  he  has  slain  his 
foe;  he  is  not  condemned  to  death;  his  friends  may 
resort  to  him  at  Mantua.  Romeus  grows  reasonable  ; 
the  Friar  advises  him  as  to  how  to  quit  Verona  unknown  ; 
and  bids  him  visit  cheerfully  his  lady's  bower.  (1257- 
1526.) 

Night  comes;  Romeus  visits  Juliet;  he  discourses  of 
Fortune,  and  exhorts  Juliet  to  patience  ;  she  pleads  to  be 
permitted  to  accompany  him  in  disguise  ;  he  explains 
that  they  would  be  pursued  and  punished  ;  he  hopes  to 
procure  his  recall  to  Verona  within  four  months  ;  if  he 
does  not,  he  will  then  carry  her  off  to  a  foreign  land. 


APPENDIX    II  193 

Juliet  submits,  only  requiring  a  promise  that  Romeus 
shall,  through  the  Friar,  keep  her  informed  of  his  state. 
(1527-1700.) 

Light  begins  to  appear  in  the  East :  "  As  yet  he  saw 
no  day,  ne  could  he  call  it  night."  Romeus  and  Juliet 
embrace  and  then  part : 

Then   hath    these    lovers    clay   an  encle,   their    night 

begonne, 
For  eche  of  them  to  other    is    as  to  the  world  the 

sunne. 

Romeus  sets  forth,  clad  as  a  merchant  venturer,  to  Mantua. 
He  states  his  grievance  to  the  Duke ;  he  is  overwhelmed 
with  sorrow.  (1701-1786.) 

Juliet  pines  and  pales,  though  she  endeavours  to 
conceal  her  grief.  Her  mother  notices  the  change  in  her  ; 
tries  to  cheer  her  ;  bids  her  forget  Tibalt's  death.  Juliet 
declares  that,  a  great  while  since,  her  last  tears  for  Tybalt 
were  shed.  Her  mother  informs  Capilet,  and  tells  him  of 
her  suspicion  that  Juliet  pines  for  envy  of  her  married 
companions  ;  she  urges  Capilet  to  have  her  married.  He 
replies  that  she  is  too  young — scarce  sixteen  years ;  yet 
he  will  seek  a  husband.  (1787-1874.) 

County  Paris,  an  Earl's  son,  becomes  a  suitor.  Her 
mother  informs  Juliet,  commending  "his  youthfull  yeres, 
his  fayrenes,  and  his  port,  and  semely  grace."  Juliet 
expresses  amazement ;  threatens  to  slay  herself;  kneels 
and  implores.  Old  Capilet  comes  to  her ;  she  grovels 
at  his  feet ;  he  charges  her  with  unthankfulness  and 
disobedience: 

thou  playest  in  this  case 
The  dainty  foole,  and  stubberne  gyrle  ;  for  want  of 

skill 
Thou  dost  refuse  thy  offred  weale,  and  disobey  my 

will. 

Unless  by  Wednesday  next  she  consents,  he  will  dis- 
inherit and  confine  her.  (1875-1996.) 

Next  morning  Juliet  visits  the  Friar  ;  states  her  case  ; 
threatens  suicide,  if  marriage  with  Paris  be  otherwise  un- 
avoidable. The  Friar  is  in  perplexity  ;  not  five  months 


194  APPENDIX    II 

past,  he  had  wedded  her  to  Romeus  ;  the  marriage  with 
Paris  is  fixed  for  the  tenth  day  of  September.  He  tells 
Juliet  of  his  youthful  travels,  in  which  he  had  learnt 
the  virtues  of  stones,  plants,  metals.  He  explains  the 
properties  of  the  sleeping-powder ;  exhorts  her  to  courage  ; 
bids  her  receive  the  "  vyoll  small,"  and  on  her  marriage- 
day  before  the  sun  clears  the  sky,  fill  it  with  water  : 

Then  drinke  it  of,  and  thou  shalt  feele  throughout 

eche  vayne  and  lim 

A  pleasant  slumber  slide,  and  quite  dispred  at  length 
On  all  thy  partes,  from  every  part  reve  all  thy  kindly 

strength. 

Her  kindred  will  suppose  her  dead  ;  will  bear  her  to 
their  forefathers'  tomb  ;  the  Friar  will  send  to  Mantua, 
and  he  and  Romeus  will  take  her  forth  that  night.  (1997- 
2172.) 

Juliet  courageously  agrees;  passes  with  stately  gait 
through  the  streets  ;  tells  her  mother  that  the  Friar  has 
made  her  another  woman,  and  consents  to  marry  Paris  ; 
she  will  go  to  her  closet  to  choose  out  the  bravest 
garments  and  richest  jewels.  Old  Capilet  praises  the 
Friar,  and  at  once  goes  to  inform  Paris ;  who  visits  Juliet, 
is  charmed,  and  now  only  desires  to  haste  the  day.  (2173- 
2276.) 

The  bridal  feast  is  prepared  ;  the  dearest  things  are 
bought.  In  Juliet's  chamber  the  Nurse  praises  Paris  ten 
times  more  than  she  had  praised  Romeus :  "  Paris  shall 
dwell  there  still,  Romeus  shall  not  retourne,"  or,  if  he  do, 
Juliet  shall  have  both  husband  and  paramour.  Juliet 
maintains  a  cheerful  aspect ;  sends  away  the  Nurse,  for 
she  would  spend  the  night  in  prayer  ;  then  hides  the  viol 
under  her  bolster,  and  retires  to  bed.  She  doubts  the 
unknown  force  of  the  powder.  Will  it  work  at  all  ? 
Serpents  and  venomous  worms  may  lurk  in  the  tomb. 
How  shall  she  endure  the  stench  of  corpses?  Will  she 
not  be  stifled  ?  She  thinks  she  sees  Tybalt's  dead  body  ; 
she  is  in  a  cold  sweat ;  fearing  her  own  weakness,  she 
swiftly  drinks  the  mixture,  then  crosses  her  arms  on  her 
breast,  and  falls  into  a  trance.  (2277-2402.) 


APPENDIX    II  105 

At  sunrise  the  Nurse  would  wake  her:  "Lady  you 
slepc  to  long,  (the  Earle)  will  rayse  you  by  and  by. ' 
She  finds  that  Juliet  is  dead;  the  mother  laments;  the 
father,  Paris,  and  a  rout  of  gentlemen  and  ladies  enter  ; 
old  Capilet  has  no  power  to  weep  or  speak  : 

If  ever  there  hath  been  a  lamentable  day, 

A  day,  ruthfull,  unfortunate  and  fatall,  then  I  say 

this  is  that  day.     (2403-2472.) 

Meanwhile  Friar  Lawrence  sends  a  friar  of  his  house 
to  Romeus  with  a  letter,  bidding  him  come  "the  next 
night  after  that,"  to  take  Juliet  from  the  tomb.  Friar 
John  hies  to  Mantua ;  seeks,  according  to  custom,  a 
companion  brother,  but,  plague  being  in  the  house,  is 
detained,  and  not  knowing  the  contents  of  the  letter,  he 
defers  till  the  morrow.  All  in  Capilet's  house  is  changed 
from  marriage  to  funeral  ;  according  to  the  Italian  manner 
Juliet  is  borne  to  the  tomb  with  open  face  and  in  wonted 
weed.  Romeus'  man,  sent  to  Verona  as  a  spy,  sees  the 
funeral,  and  bears  tidings  to  his  master.  Thinking  that 
his  death  would  be  more  glorious  if  he  died  near  Juliet, 
Romeus  resolves  to  go  to  Verona.  Me  wanders  through 
Mantua  streets,  sees  an  apothecary  sitting  outside  his 
poor  shop,  furnished  with  few  boxes,  and  bribes  him  with 
gold  to  sell  poison,  "speeding  gere,"  contrary  to  the  law. 
(2473-2588.) 

Romeus  sends  his  man,  Peter,  to  Verona,  bidding  him 
provide  instruments  to  open  the  tomb.  He  calls  for  ink 
and  paper,  and  writes  an  account  of  the  events  and  his 
design,  to  be  given  to  his  father.  At  Verona  Peter  meets 
him  with  lantern  and  instruments.  He  orders  Peter  to 
leave  him,  and  early  in  the  morning  to  deliver  the  letter 
to  his  father.  Romeus  descends  into  the  vault,  finds 
Juliet  dead,  embraces  her,  and  devours  the  poison.  He 
addresses  Juliet ;  what  more  glorious  tomb  could  he  have 
craved  ?  He  addresses  the  dead  Tybalt ;  prays  to  Christ 
for  his  grace ;  throws  himself  on  Juliet's  body,  and  dies. 
(2589-2688.) 

Friar  Lawrence  comes  to  open  the  tomb,  and  is 
startled  by  the  light  in  it.  Peter  explains  to  him  that 


196  APPENDIX    II 

his  master  is  within  ;  the  Friar  enters  and  finds  the  body 
of  Romeus.  Juliet  awakens ;  the  Friar  shows  her  lover's 
corpse ;  exhorts  her  to  patience,  and  promises  to  place 
her  in  some  religious  house.  She  weeps,  falls  on  Romeus' 
body,  covers  it  with  kisses,  and  laments  her  loss.  Hearing 
a  noise,  the  Friar  and  servant  fly.  Juliet,  with  a  speech 
welcoming  death,  plunges  Romeus'  dagger  in  her  heart. 
(2689-2792.) 

Watchmen,  supposing  that  enchanters  were  abusing 
the  dead,  enter  the  tomb,  find  the  corpses,  arrest  the 
Friar  and  Peter,  and  next  day  inform  the  Prince.  (2793- 
2808.) 

Crowds  visit  the  tomb.  By  the  Prince's  order  the 
bodies  are  placed  on  a  stage.  Peter  and  Friar  Lawrence 
are  openly  examined.  The  Friar  in  a  long  speech  justifies 
himself,  and  explains  all  that  had  happened.  His  account 
is  confirmed  by  Peter  and  by  the  letter  of  Romeus.  Prince 
Escalus  banishes  the  Nurse  and  lets  Peter  go  free.  The 
apothecary  is  hanged  by  the  throat.  The  Friar  retires  to 
a  hermitage  and  five  years  later  dies,  aged  seventy-five 
(see  line  2843).  The  bodies  of  the  lovers  are  placed  in  a 
stately  tomb,  supported  by  great  marble  pillars  : 

And  even  at  this  day  the  tombe  is  to  be  scene  ; 
So  that  among  the  monumentes  that  in  Verona  been, 
There  is  no  monument  more  worthy  of  the  sight, 
Then  is  the  tombe  of  Juliet  and  Romeus  her  knight. 
(2809-3020.) 


A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X    III 

RUNAWAY'S  EVKS 
{Footnote  to  Page  100) 

AN  editor  has  to  consider  whether  the  word  runaway 
is  to  be  retained  ;  and  if  it  is,  whether  runaway  s  or 
runaways  should  be  printed.  The  proposed  substitutes 
are  not  happy  ;  among  them  are  Rumour's,  Renomy's, 
Luna's,  unawares,  rumourors',  Cynthia's,  enemies,  rude 
day's  (Dyce,  ed.  2),  sunny  day's,  sun-weary,  and  others 
of  equal  infelicity.  The  word  runaway  is  strongly 
supported  by  the  parallel  (with  variations)  in  ideas  and 
language  of  Merchant  of  Venice,  II.  vi.  34-47.  Jessica 
is  on  the  balcony  ;  love,  she  says,  is  blind,  and  lovers 
cannot  see  their  pretty  follies.  Lorenzo  bids  her  "  come 
at  once,  For  the  close  night  doth  play  the  runaway" 
When  Lorenzo  speaks  it  is  night;  when  Juliet  speaks 
it  is  day,  and  she  is  gazing  at  the  sun. 

I  believe  the  genitive  singular  runaivays  to  be  right. 
and  I  agree  with  Warburton  that  the  sun  or  Phcebus  is 
meant.  It  is  objected  that  Juliet  has  complained  of  the 
slow  pace  of  the  sun  ;  but  now  she  imagines  night  as 
having  arrived,  and  the  tardy  sun  has  proved  himself  to 
be  the  runaway  he  actually  was. 

I  do  not  wish  to  innovate  in  the  text,  and  I  have  left 
the  commonly  received  punctuation.  But  a  different 
punctuation  might  solve  the  difficulty.  The  word  TJiat 
(before  runaway's]  may  be  the  demonstrative  pronoun,  as  in 
"  That '  banished,'  "  line  113.  "  That  runaway  "  ma}-  mean 
"yonder  runaway,"  or  "that  runaway  (of  whom  I  have 

197 


198  APPENDIX    III 

spoken)."  The  central  motive  of  the  speech  is  "  Come 
night,  come  Romeo."  Having  invoked  night  to  spread 
the  curtain,  Juliet  says,  with  a  thought  of  her  own  joyful 
wakefulness,  "Yonder  sun  may  sleep"  (wink  having 
commonly  this  sense) ;  and  then  she  calls  on  Romeo 
to  leap  to  her  arms. 

I  am  not  quite  sure  that  "  untalk'd  of  and  unseen  "  is 
rightly  connected  with  "  Romeo."  Possibly  we  should 
connect  it  with  what  follows.  Lovers  unseen  seeing  is  in 
the  manner  of  the  play.  This  is  a  secondary  question  ; 
but  perhaps  the  whole  might  be  pointed  thus : 

Spread  thy  close  curtains  love-performing  night ! 
— That  [  =  Yonder]  runaway's  eyes  may  wink — and 

Romeo, 

Leap  to  these  arms  !     Untalk'd  of  and  unseen, 
Lovers  can  see,  etc. 

If  following  Delius  we  read  runaways'  eyes,  the 
runaways  (if  not  the  stars)  must  be  wanderers  in  the 
streets.  Attempts  have  been  made  to  produce  an  ex- 
ample of  runaway  in  such  a  sense,  but,  I  think,  without 
success,  and  Professor  Hales  (Longman's  Magazine,  Feb. 
1892)  has  to  admit  that  the  word  in  this  sense  is  a 
a^a^  7.s~/6/j,ivov  not  only  in  Shakespeare,  but  in  all  English 
literature.  Expressions  of  the  desire  of  lovers  for  silence 
and  the  absence  of  babblers  can  of  course  be  found,  and 
Spenser's  Epithalamium  may  be  compared  with  Juliet's 
soliloquy,  but  the  points  in  common  are  not,  I  think, 
such  as  prove  more  than  that  a  community  of  subject 
suggested  like  ideas. 

Theobald  read  "That  th'  Runaway's"  (after  War- 
burton).  Allen  suggests  the  absorption  of  the  by  the 
final  t  in  that.  Commentators  have  named  as  the 
runaway  the  Night,  the  moon,  Phaeton,  Romeo,  Juliet, 
etc.  Halpin,  with  learning  and  ingenuity,  argues 
that  he  is  the  runaway  Cupid.  See  thirty  closely 
printed  pages  on  this  line  in  Furness's  Romeo  and 
Juliet. 

White,  who,  after  resisting  it,  came  round  to  War- 


APPENDIX    III  199 

burton's  explanation,  quotes  from    The  Faithful  Friends 
(Dycc,  Beau,  and  Flet.  vol.  iv.) : 

The  all-seeing  sun,  that  makes  fair  virgins  blush, 
But  three  short  nights  hath  hid  his  peeping  eyes ; 
Since  that  uniting  Hymen  tied  our  hearts,  etc. 

So  Mucedoms  (noted  by  Professor  Littledale),  p.  35, 
ed.  Delius :  "The  crystal  eye  of  heaven  shall  not  thrice 
wink"  i.e.  the  sun  shall  not  thrice  set. 

I  would  ask  the  reader  to  consider  my  suggestion  as 
to  "  That  runaway's  eyes "  as  offered  with  some  degree 
of  assurance  ;  but  to  observe  that  I  throw  out  the  notion 
of  pointing  "arms  !  Untalk'd  of"  merely  as  a  possibility, 
which  ought  not  to  be  wholly  lost  sight  of  in  studying 
the  passage. 


PKINTKD   BY   MOKklSON   ANIJ  GIHB  LIMT1ED,   EDINBURGH. 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


APR  0  7  1997 
\l  O/tt 


'NIV.  OF  CAUF  LIBRARY.  LOS  ANGELES 


AA      000014240 


